 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HENRY M ILLER   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flamingo 
 
An Imprint of HatperCollinsPublishers 77-85 Fulham Palace Road, Hammersmith, London W6 8JB  
A Flamingo M odem Classic 1993 98765 
Previously published in paperback by Grafton 1966 Reprinted 14 times 
First published in Great Britain by John Calder (Publishers) Limited 1964  
Copyright 0 Henry M iller 1957 Introduction copyright O Robert Nye 1993 
ISBN 0 00 654584 X Set in Plantin 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Caledonian International Book Manufacturing Ltd,   
Glasgow 
 
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise,   
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent   
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a   
similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. 
 
With    an introduction    by Robert Nye   
 
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPuhlishers 
 
Flamingo 
Tropic of Capricorn   
 
 
 
 
 1 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
by Robert Nye 
 
Henry Miller's first book.    Tropic of Cancer,    was published in Paris in 1934 and was   
immediately banned in all English-speaking countries. With its sequel. Tropic of Capricorn   
(1939), which actually covers an earlier period in M iller's life, it makes up a running   
fictional autobiography remarkable for its candour, gusto, and completeness. The two books   
have in common a plain-spoken truthfulness, a good-hearted comedy, and a quality of joy   
discovered somewhere on the far side of despair, things that their author was seldom to   
match and never to surpass in later self-unravellings. 
 
When the 'Tropics' were at last made generally available in Britain and America in the   
Sixties, they were praised as works of sexual liberation. Since then they have sometimes   
been attacked as works of sexual misogyny. All this seems to me rather to miss the point,   
as does criticism of the two books for their verbal extravagance and their lack of art.   
Probably it is no accident that nobody was ever indifferent concerning Henry M iller. There   
are those who love him and there are those who hate him. His work does not allow of the   
mild alternatives of liking or disliking. A case could be made that this itself constitutes   
a fault, but I prefer to 
 
find a virtue in such passion, and an important one. The Miller that emerges from the books   
is, to my mind, an honest and lovable person, splendidly undefeated by experience, a man   
with an unquenchable appetite for the fundamental realities, and an infinite capacity for   
being surprised by his own innocence. If there is any message extractable from his work it   
is that of someone who - against all the odds and in spite of most of the evidence - says   
'M ore' to life. This I find honourable. 
 
Even in the 'Tropics' M iller is, of course, an extraordinarily diffuse and uneven writer.   
He repeats, paraphrases, and parodies himself with an abandon that in a lesser spirit would   
be suicidal. He is sometimes brutal, he is often sentimental. But having said that, I have   
said most of what might be said against him. The best pages here, as in his one other great   
work. The Colossus of Maroussi (1941), are white-hot and inspired, both funny and terrible,   
a man's attempt to tell the whole truth about the life that he has known. Miller is one of   
the few modern writers who can move a reader to tears, quite simp ly, by the pressure of his   
own feeling. He can also communicate, and induce in the reader, a delicious delight in the   
fact of being alive. I never read Miller on song without feeling better, happier, more   
myself and less alone, for having done so. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 216 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the ovarian trolley   
 
 
Foreword to Historia Calamitatum   
(the story of my misfortunes)   
 
Often    the hearts of men and women are stirred, as likewise they are soothed in their   
sorrows, more by example than by words. And therefore, because I too have known some   
consolation from speech had with one who was a witness thereof, am I now minded to write of   
the sufferings which have sprung out of my misfortunes, for the eyes of one who, though   
absent, is of himself ever a consoler. This I do so that, in comparing your sorrows with   
mine, you may discover that yours are in truth nought, or at the most but of small account,   
and so you shall come to bear them more easily. 
 
Peter Abelard   
 
0 NCE you have given up the ghost, everything follows with dead certainty, even in the midst   
of chaos. From the beginning it was never anything but chaos: it was a fluid which   
enveloped me, which I breathed in through the gills. In the sub-strata, where the moon   
shone steady and opaque, it was smooth and fecundating; above it was a jangle and a   
discord. In everything I quickly saw the opposite, the contradiction, and between the real   
and the unreal the irony, the paradox. I was my own worst enemy. There was nothing I wished   
to do which I could just as well not do. Even as a child, when I lacked for nothing, I   
wanted to die: I wanted to surrender because I saw no sense in struggling. I felt that   
nothing would be proved, substantiated, added or subtracted by continuing an existence   
which I had not asked for. Everybody around me was a failure, or if not a failure,   
ridiculous. Especially the successful ones. The successful ones bored me to tears. I was   
sympathetic to a fault, but it was not sympathy that made me so. It was a purely negative   
quality, a weakness which blossomed at the mere sight of human misery. I never helped any   
one expecting that it would do any good; I helped because I was helpless to do otherwise.   
To want to change the condition of affairs seemed futile to me; nothing would be altered, I   
was convinced, except by a change of heart, and who could change the hearts of men? Now and   
then a friend was converted; it was something to make me puke. I had no more need of God   
than He had of me, and if there were one, I often said to myself, I would meet Him calmly   
and spit in His face. 
 
10 
 
What was most annoying was that at first blush people usually took me to be good, to be   
kind, generous, loyal, faithful. Perhaps I did possess these virtues but if so it was   
because I was indifferent: I could afford to be good, kind, generous, loyal, and so forth,   
since I was free of envy. Envy was the one thing I was never a victim of. I have never   
envied anybody or anything. On the contrary, I have only felt pity for everybody and   
everything. 
 3 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the very beginning I must have trained myself not to want anything too badly. From the   
very beginning I was independent, in a false way. I had need of nobody because I wanted to   
be free, free to do and to give only as my whims dictated. The moment anything was expected   
or demanded of me I balked. That was the form my independence took. I was corrupt, in other   
words, corrupt from the start. It's as though my mother fed me a poison, and though I was   
weaned young the poison never left my system. Even when she weaned me it seemed that I was   
completely indifferent, most children rebel, or make a pretense of rebelling, but I didn't   
give a damn, I was a philosopher when still in swaddling clothes. I was against life, on   
principle. What principle? The principle of futility. Everybody around me was struggling. I   
myself never made an effort. If I appeared to be making an effort it was only to please   
someone else; at bottom I didn't give a rap. And if you can tell me why this should have   
been    so I    will deny    it, because    I was    born with    a cussed    streak in    me and    nothing can   
eliminate it. I heard later, when I had grown up, that they had a hell of a time bringing   
me out of the womb. I can understand that perfectly. Why budge? Why come out of a nice warm   
place, a cosy retreat in which everything is offered you gratis? The earliest remembrance I   
have is of the cold, the snow and ice in the gutter, the frost on the window panes, the   
chill of the sweaty green walls in the kitchen. Why do people live in outlandish climates   
in the    temperate    zones, as they are miscalled? Because people are naturally idiots,   
naturally sluggards, naturally cowards. Until I was about ten years old I never realized   
that there were "warm" countries, places where you didn't have to sweat for a living, nor   
shiver and pretend that it 
 
11 
 
was tonic and exhilarating. Wherever there is cold there are people who work themselves to   
the bone and when they produce young they preach to the young the gospel of work -which is   
nothing, at bottom, but the doctrine of inertia. My people were entirely  Nordic, which is   
to say    idiots.    Every wrong idea which has ever been expounded was theirs. Among them was   
the doctrine of cleanliness, to say nothing of righteousness. They were painfully dean. But   
inwardly they stank. Never once had they opened the door which leads to the soul; never   
once did they dream of taking a blind leap into the dark. After dinner the dishes were   
promptly washed and put in the closet; after the paper was read it was neatly folded and   
laid away on a shelf; after the clothes were washed they were ironed and folded and then   
tucked away in the drawers. Everything was for tomorrow, but tomorrow never came. The   
present was only a bridge and on this bridge they are still groaning, as the world groans,   
and not one idiot ever thinks of blowing up the bridge. 
 
In my bitterness I often search for reasons to condemn them, the better to condemn myself.   
For I am like them too, in many ways. For a long while I thought I had escaped, but as time   
goes on I see that I am no better, that I am even a little worse, because I saw more dearly   
than they ever did and yet remained powerless to alter my life. As I look back on my life   
it seems to me that I never did anything of my own volition but always through the pressure   
of others. People often think of me as an adventurous fellow; nothing could be farther from   
the truth. My adventures were always adventitious, always thrust on me, always endured   
 4 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather than undertaken. I am of the very essence of that proud, boastful Nordic people who   
have never had the least sense of adventure but who nevertheless have scoured the earth,   
turned it upside down, scattering relics and ruins everywhere. Restless spirits, but not   
adventurous ones. Agonizing spirits, incapable of living in the present Disgraceful   
cowards, all of them, myself included. For there is only one great adventure and that is   
inward towards the self, and for that, time nor space nor even deeds matter. 
 
Once every few years I was on the verge of making this  
 
12 
 
discovery, but in characteristic fashion I always managed to dodge the issue. If I try to   
think of a good excuse I can think only of the environment, of the streets I knew and the   
people who inhabited them. I can think of no street in America, or of people inhabiting   
such a street, capable of leading one on towards the discovery of the self. I have walked   
the streets in many countries of the world but nowhere have I felt so degraded and   
humiliated as in America. I think of all the streets in America combined as forming a huge   
cesspool, a cesspool of the spirit in which everything is sucked down and drained away to   
everlasting shit. Over this cesspool the spirit of work weaves a magic wand; palaces and   
factories spring up side by side, and munition plants and chemical works and steel mills   
and sanatoriums and prisons and insane asylums. The whole continent is a nightmare   
producing the greatest misery of the greatest number. I was one, a single entity in the   
midst of the greatest jamboree of wealth and happiness (statistical wealth, statistical   
happiness) but I never met a man who was truly wealthy or truly happy. At least I knew that   
I was unhappy, unwealthy, out of whack and out of step. That was my only solace, my only   
joy. But it was hardly enough. It would have been better for my peace of mind, for my soul   
if I had expressed my rebellion openly, if I had gone to jail for it, if I had rotted there   
and died. It would have been better if, like the mad Czolgosz, I had shot some good   
President McKinley, some gentle, insignificant soul like that who had never done anyone the   
least harm. Because in the bottom of my heart there was murder: I wanted to see America   
destroyed, razed from top to bottom. I wanted to see this happen purely out of vengeance,   
as atonement for the crimes that were committed against me and against others like me who   
have never been able to lift their voices and express their hatred, their rebellion, their   
legitimate blood lust. 
 
I was the evil product of an evil soil. If the self were not imperishable, the "I" I write   
about    would    have    been    destroyed    long    ago.    To    some    this    may    seem    like    an    invention,    but   
whatever I imagine to have happened did actually happen, at least to me. History may deny   
it, since I have played no part in the history of my people, but even if everything I say   
is wrong, is 
 
13 
 
prejudiced, spiteful, malevolent, even if I am a liar and a poisoner, it is nevertheless   
 
 
 5 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the truth and it will have to be swallowed. As to what happened ... 
 
Everything that happens, when it has significance, is in the nature of a contradiction.   
Until the one for whom this is written came along I imagined that somewhere outside, in   
life, as they say, lay the solutions to all things. I thought, when I came upon her, that I   
was seizing hold of life, seizing hold of something which I could bite into. Instead I lost   
hold of life completely. I reached out for something to attach myself to - and I found   
nothing. But in reaching out, in the effort to grasp, to attach myself, left high and dry   
as I was, I nevertheless found something I had not looked for - myself. I found that what I   
had desired all my life was not to live - if what others are doing is called living - but   
to express myself. I realized that I had never the least interest in living, but only in   
this which I am doing now, something which is parallel to life, of it at the same time, and   
beyond it. What is true interests me scarcely at all, nor even what is real; only that   
interests me which I imagine to be, that which I had stifled every day in order to live.   
Whether I die today or tomorrow is of no importance to me, never has been, but that today   
even, after years of effort, I cannot say what I think and feel - that bothers me, that   
rankles. From childhood on I can see myself on the track of this spectre, enjoying nothing,   
desiring nothing but this power, this ability. Everything else is a lie - everything I ever   
did or said which did not bear upon this. And that is pretty much the greater part of my   
life. 
 
I was a contradiction in essence, as they say. People took me to be serious and high- 
minded, or to be gay and reckless, or to be sincere and earnest, or to be negligent and   
carefree. I was all these things at once - and beyond that I was something else, something   
which no one suspected, least of all myself. As a boy of six or seven I used to sit at my   
grandfather's workbench and read to him while he sewed. I remember him vividly in those 
 
14 
 
moments when, pressing the hot iron against the seam of a coat, he would stand with one   
hand over the other and look out of the window dreamily. I remember the expression on his   
face, as he stood there dreaming, better than the contents of the books I read, better than   
the conversations we had or the games which I played in the street I used to wonder what he   
was dreaming of, what it was that drew him out of himself. I hadn't learned yet how to   
dream wideawake. I was always lucid, in the moment, and all of a piece. His daydreaming   
fascinated me. I knew that he had no connection with what he was doing, not the least   
thought for any of us, that he was alone and being alone he was free. I was never alone,   
least of all when I was by myself. Always, it seems to me, I was accompanied: I was like a   
little crumb of a big cheese, which was the world, I suppose, though I never stopped to   
think about it. But I know I never existed separately, never thought myself the big cheese,   
as it were. So that even when I had reason to be miserable, to complain, to weep, I had the   
illusion of participating in a common, a universal misery. When I wept the whole world was   
weeping -so I imagined. I wept very seldom. Mostly I was happy, I was laughing, I was   
having a good time. I had a good time because, as I said before, I really didn't give a   
 6 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fuck about anything. If things were wrong with me they were wrong everywhere, I was   
convinced of it. And things were wrong usually only when one cared too much. That impressed   
itself on me very early in life. For example, I remember the case of my young friend Jack   
Lawson. For a whole year he lay in bed, suffering the worst agonies. He was my best friend,   
so people said at any rate. Well, at first I was probably sorry for him and perhaps now and   
then I called at his house to inquire about him; but after a month or two had elapsed I   
grew quite callous about his suffering. I said to myself he ought to die and the sooner he   
dies the better it will be, and having thought thus I acted accordingly, that is to say, I   
promptly forgot about him, abandoned him to his fate. I was only about twelve years old at   
the time and I remember being proud of my decision. I remember the funeral too - what a   
disgraceful affair it was. There they were, friends and relatives all congregated about the   
bier and all 
 
15 
 
of them bawling like sick monkeys. The mother especially gave me a pain in the ass. She was   
such a rare, spiritual creature, a Christian Scientist, I believe, and though she didn't   
believe in disease and didn't believe in death either, she raised such a stink that Christ   
himself would have risen from the grave. But not her beloved Jack! No, Jack lay there cold   
as ice and rigid and unbeckonable. He was dead and there were no two ways about it. I knew   
it and I was glad of it. I didn't waste any tears over it. I couldn't say that he was   
better off because after all the "he" had vanished. He was gone and with him the sufferings   
he had endured and the suffering he had unwittingly inflicted on others. Amen! I said to   
myself,    and    with    that,    being    slightly    hysterical,    I    let    a    loud    fart    -    right    beside    the   
coffin. 
 
This caring too much - I remember that it only developed with me about the time I first   
fell in love. And even then I didn't care enough. If I had really cared I wouldn't be here   
now writing about it: I'd have died of a broken heart, or I'd have swung for it. It was a   
bad experience because it taught me how to live a lie. It taught me to smile when I didn't   
want to smile, to work when I didn't believe in work, to live when I had no reason to go on   
living. Even when I had forgotten her I still retained the trick of doing what I didn't   
believe in. 
 
I was all chaos from the beginning, as I have said. But sometimes I got so close to the   
centre, to the very heart of the confusion, that it's a wonder things didn't explode around   
me. 
 
It is customary to blame everything on the war. I say the war had nothing to do with me,   
with my life. At a time when others were getting themselves comfortable berths I was taking   
one miserable job after another, and never enough in it to keep body and soul together.   
Almost as quickly as I was hired I was fired. I had plenty of intelligence but I inspired   
distrust. Whereever I went I fomented discord - not because I was idealistic but because I   
was like a searchlight exposing the stupidity and futility of everything. Besides, I wasn't   
 
 
 7 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
a good ass-licker. That marked me, no doubt. People could tell at once when I asked for a   
job that I really didn't give a damn whether I got it or not. And of course I generally   
didn't get it. But after a time the mere looking for a job became an activity, a pastime,   
so to speak. 
 
16 
 
I would go in and ask for most anything. It was a way of killing time - now worse, as far   
as I could see, than work itself. I was my own boss and I had my own hours, but unlike   
other bosses I entrained only my own ruin, my own bankruptcy. I was not a corporation or a   
trust or a state or a federation or a polity of nations - I was more like God, if anything.   
 
This went on from about the middle of the war until... well, until one day I was trapped.   
Finally the day came when I did desperately want a job. I needed it. Not having another   
minute to lose, I decided that I would take the last job on earth, that of messenger boy. I   
walked into the employment bureau of the telegraph company - the Cosmodemonic Telegraph   
Company of North America - towards the dose of the day, prepared to go through with it. I   
had just come from the public library and I had under my arm some fat books on economics   
and metaphysics. To my great amazement I was refused the job. 
 
The guy who turned me down was a little runt who ran the switchboard. He seemed to take me   
for a college student, though it was dear enough from my application that I had long left   
school. I had even honoured myself on the application with a Ph.D. degree from Columbia   
University. Apparently that passed unnoticed, or else was suspiciously regarded by this   
runt who had turned me down. I was furious, the more so because for once in my life I was   
in earnest. Not only that, but I had swallowed my pride, which in certain peculiar ways is   
rather large. My wife of course gave me the usual leer and sneer. I had done it as a   
gesture, she said. I went to bed thinking about it, still smarting, getting angrier and   
angrier as the night wore on. The fact that I had a wife and child to support didn't bother   
me so much, people didn't offer you jobs because you had a family to support, that much I   
understood only too well. No, what rankled was that they had rejected me. Henry V. M iller,   
a competent, superior individual who had asked for the lowest job in the world. That burned   
me up. I couldn't get over it. In the morning I was up bright and early, shaved, put on my    
best clothes and hot-footed it to the subway. I went immediately to the main offices of the   
telegraph company ... up to the 25th floor or wherever it was that the president and the   
vice-presi- 
 
17 
 
dents had their cubicles. I asked to see the president. Of course the president was either   
out of town or too busy to see me, but wouldn't I care to see the vice-president, or his   
secretary rather. I saw the vice-president's secretary, an intelligent, considerate sort of   
chap, and I gave him an earful. I did it adroitly, without too much heat, but letting him   
understand all the while that I wasn't to be put out of the way so easily. 
 8 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When he picked up the telephone and demanded the general manager I thought it was just a   
gag, that they were going to pass me around like that from one to the other until I'd get   
fed up. But the moment I heard him talk I changed my opinion. When I got to the general   
manager's office, which was in another building uptown, they were waiting for me. I sat   
down in a comfortable leather chair and accepted one of the big cigars that were thrust   
forward. This individual seemed at once to be vitally concerned about the matter. He wanted   
me to tell him all about it, down to the last detail, his big hairy ears cocked to catch   
the least crumb of information which would justify something or other which was formulating   
itself inside his dome. I realized that by some accident I had really been instrumental in   
doing him a service. I let him wheedle it out of me to suit his fancy, observing all the   
time which way the wind was blowing. And as the talk progressed I noticed that be was   
warming up to me more and more. At last some one was showing a little confidence in me 1   
That was all I required to get started on one of my favourite lines. For, after years of   
job hunting I had naturally become quite adept, I knew not only what not to say, but I knew   
also what to imply, what to insinuate. Soon the assistant general manager was called in and   
asked to listen to my story. By this time I knew what the story was. I understood that   
Hymie - "that little kike", as the general manager called him - had no business pretending   
that he was the employment manager. Hymie had usurped his prerogative, that much was dear.   
It was also dear that Hymie was a Jew and that Jews were not in good odour with the general   
manager, nor with Mr. Twilliger, the vice-president, who was a thorn in the general   
manager's side. 
 
Perhaps it was Hymie, "the dirty little kike" who was responsible for the high percentage   
of Jews on the messenger 
 
l8 
 
force. Perhaps Hymie was really the one who was doing the hiring at the employment office -   
at Sunset Place, they called it. It was an excellent opportunity, I gathered, for Mr.   
Clancy, the general manager, to take down a certain Mr. Bums who, he informed me, had been   
the employment manager for some thirty years now and who was evidently getting lazy on the   
job. 
 
The conference lasted several hours. Before it was terminated M r. Clancy took me aside and   
informed me that he was going to make    me    the boss of the Works. Before putting me into   
office, however, he was going to ask me as a special favour, and also as a sort of   
apprenticeship which would stand me in good stead, to work as a special messenger. I would   
receive the salary of employment manager, but it would be paid me out of a separate   
account. In short I was to float from office to office and observe the way affairs were   
conducted by all and sundry. I was to make a little report from time to time as to how   
things were going. And once in a while, so he suggested, I was to visit him at his home on   
the q.t. and have a little chat about the conditions in the hundred and one branches of the   
Cosmodemonic Telegraph Company in New York City. In other words I was to be a spy for a few   
months and after that I was to have the run of the joint. M aybe they'd make me a general   
 9 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manager too one day, or a vice-president. It was a tempting oner, even if it was wrapped up   
in a lot of horse shit. I said Yes. 
 
In a few months I was sitting at Sunset Place hiring and firing like a demon. It was a   
slaughter-house, so help me God. The thing was senseless from the bottom up. A waste of   
men, material and effort A hideous farce against a backdrop of sweat and misery. But just   
as I had accepted the spying so I accepted the hiring and firing and all that went with it.   
I said Yes to everything. If the vice-president decreed that no cripples were to be hired I   
hired no cripples. If the vice-president said that all messengers over forty-five were to   
be fired without notice I fired them without notice. I did everything they instructed me to   
do, but in such a way that they had to pay for it. When there was a strike I folded my arms   
and waited for it to blow over. But I first saw to it that it cost them a good penny. The   
whole system was so rotten, so inhuman, so lousy, so hopelessly corrupt 
 
19 
 
and complicated, that it would have taken a genius to put any sense or order into it, to   
say nothing of human kindness or consideration. I was up against the whole rotten system of   
American labour, which is rotten at both ends. I was the fifth wheel on the wagon and   
neither side had any use for me, except to exploit me. In fact, everybody was being   
exploited - the president and his gang by the unseen powers, the employees by the   
officials, and so on and around, in and out and through the whole works. From my little   
perch at "Sunset Place" I had a bird's eye view of the whole American society. It was like   
a page out of the telephone book. Alphabetically, numerically, statistically, it made   
sense. But when you looked at it up close, when you examined the pages separately, or the   
parts separately, when you examined one lone individual and what constituted him, examined   
the air he breathed, the life he led, the chances he risked, you saw something so foul and   
degrading, so low, so miserable, so utterly hopeless and senseless, that it was worse than   
looking into a volcano. You could see the whole American life - economically, politically,   
morally, spiritually, artistically, statistically, pathologically. It looked like a grand   
chancre on a worn-out cock. It looked worse than that, really, because you couldn't even   
see anything resembling a cock any more. Maybe in the past this thing had life, did produce   
something, did at least give a moment's pleasure, a moment's thrill. But looking at it from   
where I sat it looked rottener than the wormiest cheese. The wonder was that the stench of   
it didn't carry'em off... I'm using the past tense all the time, but of course it's the   
same now, maybe even a bit worse. At least now we're getting it full stink. 
 
By the time Valeska arrived on the scene I had hired several army corps of messengers. My   
office at Sunset Place was like an open sewer, and it stank like one. I had dug myself into   
the first line trench and I was getting it from all directions at once. To begin with, the   
man I had ousted died of a broken heart a few weeks after my arrival. He held out just long   
enough to break me in and then he croaked. Things happened so fast that I didn't have a   
chance to feel guilty. From the moment I arrived at the office it was one long   
uninterrupted pandemon- 
 10 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
him. An hour before my arrival -1 was always late - the place was already jammed with   
applicants. I had to elbow my way up the stairs and literally force my way in to get there.   
Hymie was worse off than I because he was tied to the barricade. Before I could take my hat   
off I had to answer a dozen telephone calls. There were three telephones on my desk and   
they all rang at once. They were bawling the piss out of me before I had even sat down to   
work. There wasn't even time to take a crap - until five or six in the afternoon. Hymie was   
worse off than I because he was tied to the switchboard. He sat there from eight in the   
morning, until six, moving waybills around. A waybill was a messenger loaned by one office   
to another office for the day or a part of the day. None of the hundred and one offices   
ever had a full staff; Hymie had to play chess with the waybills while I worked like a   
madman to plug up the gaps. If by a miracle I succeeded in a day of filling all the   
vacancies, the next morning would find the situation exactly the same - or worse. Perhaps   
twenty per cent of the force were steady; the rest was driftwood. The steady ones drove the   
new ones away. The steady ones earned forty to fifty dollars a week, sometimes sixty or   
seventy-five,    sometimes    as    much    as    a    hundred    dollars    a    week,    which    is    to    say    that    they   
earned far more than the clerks and often more than their own managers. As for the new   
ones, they found it difficult to earn ten dollars a week. Some of them worked an hour and   
quit, often throwing a batch of telegrams in the garbage can or down the sewer. And   
whenever they quit they wanted their pay immediately, which was impossible, because in the   
complicated bookkeeping which ruled no one could say what a messenger had earned until at   
least ten days later. In the beginning I invited the applicant to sit down beside me and I   
explained everything to him in detail. I did that until I lost my voice. Soon I learned to   
save my strength for the grilling that was necessary. In the first place, every other boy   
was a born liar if not a crook to boot. M any of them had already been hired and fired a   
number of times. Some found it an excellent way to find another job, because their duty   
brought them to hundreds of offices which normally they would never have set foot in.   
Fortunately McGovern, the old trusty who guarded the door and 
 
21 
 
handed out the application blanks, had a camera eye. And then there were the big ledgers   
behind me, in which there was a record of every applicant who had ever passed through the   
mill. The ledgers were very much like a police record; they were full of red ink marks,   
signifying    this    or    that    delinquency.    To    judge    from    the    evidence    I    was    in    a    tough    spot.   
Every other name involved a theft, fraud, a brawl, or dementia or perversion or idiocy. "Be   
careful - so-and-so is an epileptic!" "Don't hire this man - he's a nigger 1" "Watch out -   
X has been in Dannemora - or else in Sing Sing." 
 
If I had been a stickler for etiquette nobody would ever have been hired. I had to learn   
quickly, and not from the records or from those about me, but from experience. There were a   
thousand and one details by which to judge an applicant: I had to take them all in at once,   
and quickly, because in one short day, even if you are as fast as Jack Robinson, you can   
 11 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only hire so many and no more. And no matter how many I hired it was never enough. The next   
day it would begin all over again. Some I knew would last only a day, but I had to hire   
them just the same. The system was wrong from start to finish, but it was not my place to   
criticize the system. It was mine to hire and fire. I was in the centre of a revolving disk   
which was whirling so fast that nothing could stay put. What was needed was a mechanic, but   
according to the logic of the higher-ups there was nothing wrong with the mechanism,   
everything was fine and dandy except that things were temporarily out of order. And things   
being temporarily out of order brought on epilepsy, theft, vandalism, perversion, niggers,   
Jews, whores and what-not - sometimes strikes and lockouts. Whereupon, according to this   
logic, you took a big broom and you swept the stable dean, or you took clubs and guns and   
you beat sense into the poor idiots who were suffering from the illusion that things were   
fundamentally wrong. It was good now and then to talk of God, or to have a little community   
sing - maybe even a bonus was justifiable now and then, that is when things were getting   
too terribly bad for words. But on the whole, the important thing was to keep hiring and   
firing; as long as there were men and ammunition we were to advance, to keep mopping up the   
 
22 
 
trenches. Meanwhile Hymie kept taking cathartic pills -enough to blow out his rear end if   
he had bad a rear end, but he hadn't one any more, he only imagined he was taking a crap,   
he only imagined he was shitting on his can. Actually the poor bugger was in a trance.   
There were a hundred and one offices to look after and each one had a staff of messengers   
which was mythical, if not hypothetical, and whether the messengers were real or unreal,   
tangible or intangible, Hymie had to shuffle them about from morning to night while I   
plugged up the holes, which was also imaginary because who could say when a recruit had   
been dispatched to an office whether he would arrive there today or tomorrow or never. Some   
of them got lost in the subway or in the labyrinths under the skyscrapers; some rode around   
on the elevated line all day because with a uniform it was a free ride and perhaps they had   
never enjoyed riding around all day on the elevated lines. Some of them started for Staten   
Island and ended up in Canarsie, or else were brought back in a coma by a cop. Some forgot   
where they lived and disappeared completely. Some whom we hired for New York turned up in   
Philadelphia a month later as though it were normal and according to Hoyle. Some would   
start for their destination and on the way decide that it was easier to sell newspapers and   
they would sell them in the uniform we had given them, until they were picked up. Some went   
straight to the observation ward, moved by some strange preservative instinct. 
 
When he arrived in the morning Hymie first sharpened his pencils; he did this religiously   
no matter how many calls were coming in, because, as he explained to me later, if he didn't   
sharpen the pencils first thing off the bat they would never get sharpened. The next thing   
was to take a glance out the window and see what the weather was like. Then, with a freshly   
sharpened pencil he made a little box at the head of the slate which he kept beside him and   
in it he gave the weather report. This, he also informed me, often turned out to be a   
useful alibi. If the snow were a foot thick or the ground covered with sleet, even the   
devil himself might be excused for not shuffling the waybills around more speedily, and the   
 12 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment manager might also be excused for not filling up the holes on such days, 
 
23 
 
no? But why he didn't take a crap first instead of plugging in on the switchboard soon as   
his pencils were sharpened was a mystery to me. That too he explained to me later. Anyway,   
the day always broke with confusion, complaints, constipation and vacancies. It also began   
with loud smelly farts, with bad breaths, with ragged nerves, with epilepsy, with   
meningitis, with low wages, with back pay that was overdue, with worn-out shoes, with corns   
and bunions, with flat feet and broken arches, with pocket books missing and fountain pens   
lost or stolen, with telegrams floating in the sewer, with threats from the vice-president   
and advice from the managers, with wrangles and disputes, with cloudbursts and broken   
telegraph wires, with new methods of efficiency and old ones that had been discarded, with   
hope for better times and a prayer for the bonus which never came. The new messengers were   
going over the top and getting machine-gunned; the old ones were digging in deeper and   
deeper, like rats in a cheese. Nobody was satisfied, especially not the public. It took ten   
minutes to reach San Francisco over the wire, but it might take a year to get the message   
to the man whom it was intended for - or it might never reach him. 
 
The Y.M .C.A., eager to improve the morale of working boys everywhere in America, were   
holdings meetings at noon hour and wouldn't I like to send a few spruce-looking boys to   
hear William Carnegie Asterbilt Junior give a five minute talk on service. M r. Mallory of   
the Welfare League would like to know if I could spare a few minutes some time to tell me   
about the model prisoners who were on parole and who would be glad to serve in any   
capacity, even as messengers. Mrs. Guggenhoffer of the Jewish Charities would be very   
grateful if I would aid her in maintaining some broken-down homes which had broken down   
because everybody was either infirm, crippled or disabled in the family. M r. Haggerty of   
the Runaway Home for Boys was sure he had just the right youngsters for me, if only I would   
give them a chance; all of them had been mistreated by their stepfathers or stepmothers.   
The Mayor of New York would appreciate it if I would give my personal attention to the   
bearer of the said letter whom he could vouch for in every way -but why the hell he didn't   
give said bearer a job himself was a 
 
24 
 
mystery. M an leaning over my shoulder hands me a slip of paper on which he has just written   
- "Me understand everything but me no hear the voices." Luther Winifred is standing beside   
him, his tattered coat fastened together with safety pins. Luther is two sevenths pure   
Indian and five sevenths German-American, so he explains. On the Indian side he is a Crow,   
one of the Crows from Montana. His last job was putting up window shades, but there is no   
ass in his pants and he is ashamed to climb a ladder in front ofa lady. He got out of the   
hospital the other day and so he is still a little weak, but he is not too weak to carry   
messages, so he thinks. 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
And then there is Ferdinand Mish - how could I have forgotten him? He has been waiting in   
line all morning to get a word with me. I never answered the letters he sent me. Was that   
just? he asks me blandly. Of course not. I remember vaguely the last letter he sent me from   
the Cat and Dog Hospital on the Grand Concourse, where he was an attendant. He said he   
repented that he had resigned his post "but it was on account of his father being too   
strict over him, not giving him any recreation or outside pleasure". "I'm twenty -five now,"   
he wrote, "and I don't think I should ought to be sleeping no more with my father, do you?   
I know you are said to be a very fine gentleman and I am now self-dependent, so I hope ..."   
McGovem, the old trusty, is standing by Ferdinand's side waiting for me to give him the   
sign. He wants to give Ferdinand the bum's rush - he remembers him from five years ago when   
Ferdinand lay down on the sidewalk in front of the main office in full uniform and threw an   
epileptic fit. No, shit, I can't do it! I'm going to give him a chance, the poor bastard.   
Maybe I'll send him to Chinatown where things are fairly quiet. Meanwhile, while Ferdinand   
is changing into a uniform in the back room, I'm getting an earful from an orphan boy who   
wants to "help make the company a success". He says that if I give him a chance he'll pray   
for me every Sunday when he goes to church, except the Sundays when he has to report to his   
parole officer. He didn't do nothing, it appears. He just pushed the fellow and the fellow   
fell on his head and got killed. Next: An ex-consul from Gibraltar. Writes a beautiful hand   
- too beauti- 
 
25 
 
fill. I ask him to see me at the end of the day - something fishy about him. M eanwhile   
Ferdinand's thrown a fit in the dressing room. Lucky break! If it had happened in the   
subway, with a number on his hat and everything, I'd have been canned. 
 
A guy with one arm and mad as hell because M cGovem is showing him the door. "What the hell!   
I'm strong and healthy, ain't I?" he shouts, and to prove it he picks up a chair with his   
good arm and smashes it to bits. I get back to the desk and there's a telegram lying there   
for me. I open it. It's from George Blasini, ex-messenger No. 2459 of S.W. office. "I am   
sorry that I had to quit so soon, but the job was not fitted for my character idleness and   
I am a true lover of labour and frugality but many a time we be unable to control or subdue   
our personal pride." Shit! 
 
In the beginning I was enthusiastic, despite the damper above and the clamps below. I had   
ideas and I executed them, whether it pleased the vice-president or not. Every ten days or   
so I was put on the carpet and lectured for having "too big a heart". I never had any money   
in my pocket but I used other people's money freely. As long as I was the boss I had   
credit. I gave money away right and left; I gave my clothes away and my linen, my books,   
everything that was superfluous. If I had had the power I would have given the company away   
to the poor buggers who pestered me. If I was asked for a dime I gave a half dollar, if I   
was asked for a dollar I gave five. I didn't give a fuck how much I gave away, because it   
was easier to borrow and give than to refuse the poor devils. I never saw such an   
aggregation of misery in my life, and I hope I'll never see it again. Men are poor   
 14 
 216 
 
   
Next: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everywhere - they always have been and they always will be. And beneath the terrible   
poverty there is a flame, usually so low that it is almost invisible. But it is there and   
if one has the courage to blow on it it can become a conflagration. I was constantly urged   
not to be too lenient, not to be too sentimental, not to be too charitable. Be firm! Be   
hard! they cautioned me. Fuck that! I said to myself, I'll be generous, pliant, forgiving,   
tolerant, tender. In the beginning I heard every man to the end; if I couldn't give him a   
job I gave him money, and if I had no money I gave him cigarettes or I gave 
 
26 
 
him courage. But I gave! The effect was dizzying. Nobody can estimate the results of a good   
deed, of a kind word. I was swamped with gratitude, with good wishes, with invitations,   
with pathetic, tender little gifts. If I had had real power, instead of being the fifth   
wheel on a wagon. God knows what I might have accomplished. I could have used the   
Cosmodemonic Telegraph Company of North America as a base to bring all humanity to God; I   
could have transformed North and South America alike, and the Dominion of Canada too. I had   
the secret in my hand: it was to be generous, to be kind, to be patient. I did the work of   
five men. I hardly slept for three years. I didn't own a whole shirt and often I was so   
ashamed of borrowing from my wife, or robbing the kid's bank, that to get the car fare to   
go to work in the morning I would swindle the blind newspaperman at the subway station. I   
owed so much money all around that if I were to work for twenty years I would not have been   
able to pay it back. I took from those who had and I gave to those who needed, and it was   
the right thing to do, and I would do it all over again if I were in the same position. 
 
I even accomplished the miracle of stopping the crazy turnover, something that nobody had   
dared to hope for. Instead of supporting my efforts they undermined me. According to the   
logic of the higher-ups the turnover had ceased because the wages were too high. So they   
cut the wages. It was like kicking the bottom out of a bucket. The whole edifice tumbled,   
collapsed on my hands. And, just as though nothing had happened they insisted that the gaps   
be plugged up immediately. To soften the blow a bit they intimated that I might even   
increase the percentage of Jews, I might take on a cripple now and then, if he were   
capable, I might do this and that, all of which they had informed me previously was against   
the code. I was so furious that I took on anything and everything; I would have taken on   
broncos and gorillas if I could have imbued them with the modicum of intelligence which was   
necessary to deliver messages. A few days previously there had been only five or six   
vacancies at dosing time. Now there were three hundred, four hundred, five hundred - they   
were running out like sand. It 
 
27 
 
was marvellous. I sat there and without asking a question I took them on in carload lots -   
niggers, Jews, paralytics, cripples, ex-convicts, whores, maniacs, perverts, idiots, any   
fucking bastard who could stand on two legs and hold a telegram in his hand. The managers   
of the hundred and one offices were frightened to death. I laughed. I laughed all day long   
 15 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thinking what a fine stinking mess I was making of it Complaints were pouring in from all   
parts of the city. The service was crippled, constipated, strangulated. A mule could have   
gotten there faster than some of the idiots I put into harness. 
 
The best thing about the new day was the introduction of female messengers. It changed the   
whole atmosphere of the joint. For Hymie especially it was a godsend. He moved his   
switchboard around so that he could watch me while juggling the waybills back and forth.   
Despite the added work he had a permanent erection. He came to work with a smile and he   
smiled all day long. He was in heaven. At the end of the day I always had a list of five or   
six who were worth trying out. The game was to keep them on the string, to promise them a   
job but to get a free fuck first. Usually it was only necessary to throw a feed into them   
in order to bring them back to the office at night and lay them out on the zinc-covered   
table in the dressing room. If they had a cosy apartment, as they sometimes did, we took   
them home and finished it in bed. If they liked to drink Hymie would bring a bottle along.   
If they were any good and really needed some dough Hymie would flash his roll and peel off   
a five spot or a ten spot as the case might be. It makes my mouth water when I think of   
that roll he carried about with him. Where he got it from I never knew, because he was the   
lowest paid man in the joint. But it was always there, and no matter what I asked for I   
got. And once it happened that we did get a bonus and I paid Hymie back to the last penny -   
which so amazed him that he took me out that night to Delmonico's and spent a fortune on   
me. Not only that, but the next day he insisted on buying me hat and shirts and gloves. He   
even insinuated that I might come home and fuck his wife, if I liked, though he warned me   
that she was having a little trouble at present with her ovaries. 
 
28 
 
In addition to Hymie and McGovem I had as assistants a pair of beautiful blondes who often   
accompanied us to dinner in the evening. And there was O'M ara, an old friend of mine who   
had just returned from the Philippines and whom I made my chief assistant. There was also   
Steve Romero, a prize bull whom I kept around in case of trouble. And O'Rourke, the company   
detective, who reported to me at the dose of day when he began his work. Finally I added   
another man to the staff - Kronski, a young medical student, who was diabolically   
interested in the pathological cases of which we had plenty. We were a merry crew, united   
in our desire to fuck the company at all costs. And while fucking the company we fucked   
everything in sight that we could get hold of, O'Rourke excepted, as he had a certain   
dignity to maintain, and besides he had trouble with his prostate and had lost all interest   
in fucking. But O'Rourke was a prince of a man, and generous beyond words. It was O'Rourke   
who often invited us to dinner in the evening and it was O'Rourke we went to when we were   
in trouble. 
 
That was how it stood at Sunset Place after a couple of years had rolled by. I was   
saturated with humanity, with experiences of one kind and another. In my sober moments I   
made notes which I intended to make use of later if ever I should have a chance to record   
my experiences. I was waiting for a breathing spell. And then by chance one day, when I had   
 16 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been put on the carpet for some wanton piece of negligence, the vice-president let drop a   
phrase which stuck in my crop. He had said that he would like to see some one write a sort   
of Horatio Alger book about the messengers; he hinted that perhaps I might be the one to do   
such    a job.    I was    furious to    think what    a ninny    he was    and delighted    at the    same time   
because secretly I was itching to get the thing off my chest. I thought to myself- you poor   
old futzer, you, just wait until I get it off my chest... I'll give you an Horatio Alger   
book .. . just you wait! My head was in a whirl leaving his office. I saw the army of men,   
women and children that had passed through my hands, saw them weeping, begging, beseeching,   
imploring, cursing, spitting, fuming, threatening. I saw the tracks they left on the   
highways, the 
 
29 
 
freight trains lying on the floor, the parents in rags, the coal box empty, the sink   
running over, the walls sweating and between the cold beads of sweat the cockroaches   
running like mad; I saw them hobbling along like twisted gnomes or falling backwards in the   
epileptic frenzy, the mouth twitching, thesaliva pouring from the lips, the limbs writhing;   
I saw the walls giving way and the pest pouring out like a winged fluid, and the men higher   
up with their ironclad logic, waiting for it to blow over, waiting for everything to be   
patched up, waiting, waiting contentedly, smugly, with big cigars in their mouths and their   
feet    on    the    desk,    saying    things    were    temporarily    out    of    order.    I    saw    the    Horatio    Alger   
hero, the dream of a sick American, mounting higher and -higher, first messenger, then   
operator, then manager, then chief, then superintendent, then vice-president, then   
president, then trust magnate, then beer baron, then Lord of all the Americas, the money   
god, the god of gods, the clay of clay, nullity on high, zero with ninety -seven thousand   
decimals fore and aft. You shits, I said to myself, I will give you the picture of twelve   
little men, zeros without decimals, ciphers, digits, the twelve uncrushable worms who are   
hollowing out the base of your rotten edifice. I will give you Horatio Alger as he looks   
the day after the Apocalypse, when all the stink has cleared away. 
 
From all over the earth they had come to me to be succoured. Except for the primitives   
there was scarcely a race which wasn't represented on the force. Except for the Ainus, the   
Maoris, the Papuans, the Veddas, the Lapps, the Zulus, the Patagonians, the Igorotes, the   
Hottentots, the Touaregs, except for the lost Tasmanians, the lost Grimaldi men, the lost   
Atianteans, I had a representative of almost every species under the sun. I had two   
brothers who were still sun-worshippers, two Nestorians from the old Assyrian world; I had   
two Maltese twins from M alta and a descendant of the M ayas from Yucatan; I had a few of our   
little brown brothers from the Philippines and some Ethiopians from Abyssinia; I had men   
from the pampas of Argentina and stranded cowboys from M ontana; I had Greeks, Letts, Poles,   
Croats, Slovenes, Ruthenians, Czechs, Spaniards, Welshmen, Finns, Swedes, Russians, Danes,   
Mexicans, Porto 
 
30 
 
 
 
 17 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Ricans, Cubans, Uruguayans, Brazilians, Australians, Persians, Japs, Chinese, Javanese,   
Egyptians, Africans from the Gold Coast and the Ivory Coast, Hindus, Armenians, Turks,   
Arabs, Germans, Irish, English, Canadians - and plenty of Italians and plenty of Jews. I   
had only one Frenchman that I can recall and he lasted about three hours. I had a few   
American Indians, Cherokees mostly, but no Tibetans, and no Eskimos: I saw names I could   
never have imagined and handwriting which ranged from cuneiform to the sophisticated and   
astoundingly beautiful calligraphy of the Chinese. I heard men beg for work who had been   
Egyptologists, botanists, surgeons, gold-miners, professors of Oriental languages,   
musicians, engineers, physicians, astronomers, anthropologists, chemists, mathematicians,   
mayors of cities and governors of states, prison warders, cow-punchers, lumberjacks,   
sailors, oyster pirates, stevedores, riveters, dentists, surgeons, painters, sculptors,   
plumbers, architects, dope peddlers, abortionists, white slavers, sea divers, steeplejacks,   
farmers, cloak and suit salesmen, trappers, lighthouse keepers, pimps, aldermen, senators,   
every bloody thing under the sun, and all of them down and out, begging for work for   
cigarettes, for carfare, for a chance, Christ Almighty, just another chance! I saw and got   
to know men who were saints, if there are saints in this world; I saw and spoke to savants,   
crapulous and uncrapulous ones; I listened to men who had the divine fire in their bowels   
who could have convinced God Almighty that they were worthy of another chance, but not the   
vice-president of the Cosmococcus Telegraph Company. I sat riveted to my desk and I   
travelled around the world at lightning speed, and I learned that everywhere it is the same   
-hunger, humiliation, ignorance, vice, greed, extortion, chicanery, torture, despotism: the   
inhumanity of man to man: the fetters, the harness, the halter, the bridle, the whip, the   
spurs. The finer the calibre the worse off the man. Men were walking the streets of New   
York in that bloody, degrading outfit, the despised, the lowest of the low, walking around   
like auks, like penguins, like oxen, like trained seals, like patient donkeys, like big   
jackasses, like crazy gorillas, like docile maniacs nibbling at the    dangling    bait, like   
waltzing mice, like guinea pigs, like 
 
31 
 
squirrels, like rabbits, and many and many a one was fit to govern the world, to write tile   
greatest book ever written. When I think of some of the Persians, the Hindus, the Arabs I   
knew, when I think of the character they revealed, their grace, their tenderness, their   
intelligence,    their holiness,    I spit on the white conquerors of the world, the degenerate   
British, the pigheaded Germans, the smug self-satisfied French. The earth is one great   
sentient being, a planet saturated through and through with man, a live planet expressing   
itself falteringly and stutteringly; 
 
it is not the home of the white race or the black race or the yellow race or the lost blue   
race, but the home of man and all men are equal before God and will have their chance, if   
not now then a million years hence. The little brown brothers of the Philippines may bloom   
again, one day and the murdered Indians of America north and south may also come alive one   
day to ride the plains where now the cities stand belching fire and pestilence. Who has the   
last say? Man! The earth is his because he is the earth, its fire, its water, its air, its   
 18 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mineral and vegetable matter, its spirit which is cosmic, which is imperishable, which is   
the spirit of all the planets, which transforms itself through him, through endless signs   
and symbols, through endless manifestations. Wait, you cosmococcic telegraphic shits, you   
demons on high waiting for the plumbing to be repaired, wait, you dirty white conquerors   
who have sullied the earth with your cloven hooves, your instruments, your weapons, your   
disease germs, wait, all you who are sitting in clover and counting your coppers, it is not   
the end. The last man will have his say before it is finished. Down to the last sentient   
molecule justice must be done -    and will be done!    Nobody is getting away with anything,   
least of all the cosmococdc shits of North America. 
 
When it came time for my vacation -1 hadn't taken one for three years, I was so eager to   
make the company a success! -1 took three weeks instead of two and I wrote the book about   
the twelve little men. I wrote it straight off, five, seven, sometimes eight thousand words   
a day. I thought that a man, to be a writer, must do at least five thousand words a day. I   
thought he must say everything all at once - in one book - and collapse 
 
32 
 
afterwards. I didn't know a thing about writing. I was scared shitless. But I was   
determined to wipe Horatio Alger out of the North American consciousness. I suppose it was   
the worst book any man has ever written. It was a colossal tome and faulty from start to   
finish. But it was my first book and I was in love with it. If I had the money, as Gide   
had, I would have published it at my own expense. If I had had the courage that Whitman   
had, I would have peddled it from door to door. Everybody I showed it to said it was   
terrible. I was urged to give up the idea of writing. I had to learn, as Balzac did, that   
one must write volumes before signing one's own name. I had to leam, as I soon did, that   
one must give up everything and not do anything else but write, that one must write and   
write    and    write,    even    if    everybody    in    the    world    advises    you    against    it,    even    if    nobody   
believes in you. Perhaps one does it just because nobody believes; perhaps the real secret   
lies in making people believe. That the book was inadequate, faulty, bad, terrible, as they   
said, was only natural. I was attempting at the start what a man of genius would have   
undertaken only at the end. I wanted to say the last word at the beginning. It was absurd   
and pathetic. It was a crushing defeat, but it put iron in my backbone and sulphur in my   
blood. I knew at least what it was to fail. I knew what it was to attempt something big.   
Today, when I think of the circumstances under which I wrote that book, when I think of the   
overwhelming material which I tried to put into form, when I think of what I hoped to   
encompass, I pat myself on the back, I give myself a double A. I am proud of the fact that   
I made such a miserable failure of it; had I succeeded I would have been a monster.   
Sometimes, when I look over my notebooks, when I look at the names alone of those whom I   
thought to write about, I am seized with vertigo. Each man came to me with a world of his   
own; he came to me and unloaded it on my desk; he expected me to pick it up and put it on   
my shoulders. I had no time to make a world of my own: I had to stay fixed like Atlas, my   
feet on the elephant's back and the elephant on the tortoise's back. To inquire on what the   
tortoise stood would be to go mad. I didn't dare to think of anything then except the   
 19 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"facts". 
 
33 
 
To get beneath the facts I would have had to be an artist, and one doesn't become an artist   
overnight. First you have to be crushed, to have your conflicting points of view   
annihilated. You have to be wiped out as a human being in order to be born again an   
individual. You have to be carbonized and mineralized in order to work upwards from the   
last common denominator of the self. You have to get beyond pity in order to feel from the   
very roots of your being. One can't make a new heaven and earth with "facts". There are no   
"facts" - there is only the fact that man, every man everywhere in the world, is on his way   
to ordination. Some men take the long route and some take the short route. Every man is   
working out his destiny in his own way and nobody can be of help except by being kind,   
generous and patient. In my enthusiasm certain things were then inexplicable to me which   
now are dear. I think, for example, of Carnahan, one of the twelve little men I had chosen   
to write about. He was what is called a model messenger. He was a graduate of a prominent   
university, had a sound intelligence and was of exemplary character. He worked eighteen and   
twenty hours a day and earned more than any messenger on the force. The clients whom he   
served wrote letters about him, praising him to the skies; he was offered good positions   
which he refused for one reason or another. He lived frugally, sending the best part of his   
wages to his wife and children who lived in another city. He had two vices - drink and the   
desire to succeed. He could go for a year without drinking, but if he took one drop he was   
off. He had deaned up twice in Wall Street and yet, before coming to me for a job, he had   
gotten no further than to be a sexton of a church in some little town. He had been fired   
from that job because he had broken into the sacramental wine and rung the bells all night   
long. He was truthful, sincere, earnest. I had implicit confidence in him and my confidence   
was proven by the record of his service which was without a blemish. Nevertheless he shot   
his wife and children in cold blood and then he shot himself. Fortunatdy none of them died;   
they all lay in the hospital together and they all recovered. I went to see his wife, after   
they had transferred him to jail, to get her help. She refused categorically. She said he   
was the meanest, 
 
34 
 
cruellest son of a bitch that ever walked on two legs - she wanted to see him hanged. I   
pleaded with her for two days, but she was adamant. I went to the jail and talked to him   
through the mesh. I found that he had already made himself popular with the authorities,   
had already been granted special privileges. He wasn't at all dejected. On the contrary, he   
was looking forward to making the best of his time in prison by "studying up" on   
salesmanship. He was going to be the best salesman in America after his release. I might   
almost say that he seemed happy. He said not to worry about him, he would get along all   
right. He said everybody was swell to him and that he had nothing to complain about. I left   
him somewhat in a daze. I went to a nearby beach and decided to take a swim. I saw   
everything with new eyes. I almost forgot to return home, so absorbed had I become in my   
 20 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
speculations about this chap. Who could say that everything that happened to him had not   
happened for the best? Perhaps he might leave the prison a full-fledged evangelist instead   
of a salesman. Nobody could predict what he might do. And nobody could aid him because he   
was working out his destiny in his own private way. 
 
There was another chap, a Hindu named Guptal. He was not only a model of good behaviour -   
he was a saint. He had a passion for the flute which he played all by himself in his   
miserable little room. One day he was found naked, his throat slit from ear to ear, and   
beside him on the bed was his flute. At the funeral there were a dozen women who wept   
passionate tears, including the wife of the janitor who had murdered him. I could write a   
book about this young man who was the gentlest and the holiest man I ever met, who had   
never offended anybody and never taken anything from anybody, but who had made the cardinal   
mistake of coming to America to spread peace and love. 
 
There was Dave Olinski, another faithftil, industrious messenger who thought of nothing but   
work. He had one fatal weakness - he talked too much. When he came to me he had already   
been around the globe several times and what he hadn't done to make a living isn't worth   
telling about. He knew about twelve languages and he was rather proud of his linguistic 
 
35 
 
ability. He was one of those men whose very willingness and enthusiasm is their undoing. He   
wanted to help everybody along, show everybody how to succeed. He wanted more work than we   
could give him - he was a glutton for work. Perhaps I should have warned him, when I sent   
him to his office on the East Side, that he was going to work in a tough neighbourhood, but   
he pretended to know so much and he was so insistent on working in that locality (because   
of his linguistic ability) that I said nothing. I thought to myself - you'll find out   
quickly enough for yourself. And surely enough, he was only there a short time when he got   
into trouble. A tough Jew boy from the neighbourhood walked in one day and asked for a   
blank. Dave, the messenger, was behind the desk. He didn't like the way the man asked for   
the blank. He told him he ought to be more polite. For that he got a box in the ears. That   
made him wag his tongue some more, whereupon he got such a wallop that his teeth flew down   
his throat and his jaw-bone was broken in three places. Still he didn't know enough to hold   
his trap. Like the damned fool that he was he goes to the police station and registers a   
complaint. A week later, while he's sitting on a bench snoozing, a gang of roughnecks break   
into the place and beat him to a pulp. His head was so battered that his brains looked like   
an omelette. For good measure they emptied the safe and turned it upside down. Dave died on   
the way to hospital. They found five hundred dollars hidden away in the toe of his   
sock. ... Then there was Clausen and his wife Lena. They came in together when he applied   
for the job. Lena had a baby in her arms and he had two little ones by the hand. They were   
sent to me by some relief agency. I put him on as a night messenger so that he'd have a   
fixed salary. In a few days I had a letter from him, a batty letter in which he asked me to   
excuse him for being absent as he had to report to his parole officer. Then another letter   
saying that his wife had refused to sleep with him because she didn't want any more babies   
 21 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and would I please come to see them and try to persuade her to sleep with him -. I went to   
his home - a cellar in the Italian quarter. It looked like a bughouse. Lena was pregnant   
again, about seven months under way, and on the verge of idiocy. She had taken to sleeping   
on the roof 
 
36 
 
because it was too hot in the cellar, also because she didn't want him to touch her any   
more. When I said it wouldn't make any difference now she just looked at me and grinned.   
Clausen had been in the war and maybe the gas had made him a bit goofy - at any rate he was   
foaming at the mouth. He said he would brain her if she didn't stay off that roof. He   
insinuated that she was sleeping up there in order to carry on with the coal man who lived   
in the attic. At this Lena smiled again with that mirthless batrachian grin. Clausen lost   
his temper and gave her a swift kick in the ass. She went out in a huff taking the brats   
with her. He told her to stay out for good. Then he opened a drawer and pulled out a big   
Colt. He was keeping it in case he needed it some time, he said. He showed me a few knives   
too, and a sort of blackjack which he had made himself. Then he began to weep. He said his   
wife    was making    a fool    of him.    He said    he was    sick of    workin g for    her because    she was   
sleeping with everybody in the neighbourhood. The kids weren't his because he couldn't make   
a kid any more even if he wanted to. The very next day, while Lena was out marketing, he   
took the kids up to the roof and with the blackjack he had shown me he beat their brains   
out. Then he jumped off the roof head first. When Lena came home and saw what happened she   
went off her nut. They had to put her in a straight-jacket and call for the ambulance...   
There was Schuldig the rat who had spent twenty years in prison for a crime he had never   
committed. He had been beaten almost to death before he confessed; then solitary   
confinement, starvation, torture, perversion, dope. When they finally released him he was   
no longer a human being. He described to me one night his last thirty days in jail, the   
agony of waiting to be released. I have never heard anything like it; I didn't think a   
human being could survive such anguish. Freed, he was haunted by the fear that he might be   
obliged to commit a crime and be sent back to prison again. He complained of being   
followed, spied on, perpetually tracked. He said "they" were tempting him to do things he   
had no desire to do. "They" were the dicks who were on his trail, who were paid to bring   
him back again. At night, when he was asleep, they whispered in his ear. He was powerless   
against 
 
37 
 
them because they mesmerized him first. Sometimes they placed dope under his pillow, and   
with it a revolver or a knife. They wanted him to kill some innocent person so that they   
would have a solid case against him this time. He got worse and worse. One night, after he   
had walked around for hours with a batch of telegrams in his pocket, he went up to a cop   
and asked to be locked up. He couldn't remember his name or address or even the office he   
was    working    for.    He    had    completely    lost    his    identity.    He    repeated    over    and    over    -    "I'm   
innocent... I'm innocent." Again they gave him the third degree. Suddenly he jumped up and   
 22 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shouted like a madman - "I'll confess ... I'll confess" - and with that he began to reel   
off one crime after another. He kept it up for three hours. Suddenly in the midst of a   
harrowing confession, he stopped short, gave a quick look about, like a man who has   
suddenly come to, and then, with the rapidity and the force which only a madman can summon   
he made a tremendous leap across the room and crashed his skull against the stone wall... I   
relate these incidents briefly and hurriedly as they flash through my mind; my memory is   
packed with thousands of such details, with a myriad faces, gestures, tales, confessions   
all entwined and interlaced like the stupendous reeling facade of some Hindu temple made   
not of stone but of the experience of human flesh, a monstrous dream edifice built entirely   
of reality and yet not reality itself but merely the vessel in which the mystery of the   
human being is contained. My mind wanders to the clinic where in ignorance and good-will I   
brought some of the younger ones to be cured. I can think of no more evocative image to   
convey the atmosphere of this place than the painting by Hieronymus Bosch in which the   
magician, after the manner of a dentist extracting a live nerve, is represented as the   
deliverer of insanity. All the trumpery and quackery of our scientific practitioners came   
to    apotheosis    in    the    person    of    the    suave    sadist    who    operated    this    clinic    with    the    full   
concurrence and connivance of the law. He was a ringer for Caligari, except that he was   
minus the dunce cap. Pretending that he understood the secret regulations of the glands,   
invested with the powers of a mediaeval monarch, oblivious of the pain he inflicted,   
ignorant of everything but 
 
38 
 
his medical knowledge, he went to work on the human organism like a plumber sets to work on   
the underground drainpipes. In addition to the poisons he threw into the patient's system   
he had recourse to his fists or his knees as the case might be. Anything justified a   
"reaction". If the victim were lethargic he shouted at him, slapped him in the face,   
pinched his arm, cuffed him, kicked him. If on the contrary the victim were too energetic   
he employed the same methods, only with redoubled zest. The feelings of his subject were of   
no importance to him; whatever reaction he succeeded in obtaining was merely a   
demonstration or manifestation of the laws regulating the operation of the internal glands   
of secretion. The purpose of his treatment was to render the subject fit for society. But   
no matter how fast he worked, no matter whether he was successful or not successful,   
society was turning out more and more misfits. Some of them were so marvellously maladapted   
that when, in order to get proverbial reaction, he slapped them vigorously on the cheek   
they responded with an uppercut or a kick in the balls. It's true, most of his subjects   
were exactly what he described them to be - incipient criminals. The whole continent was on   
the slide - is still on the slide - and not only the glands need regulating but the ball- 
bearing, the armature, the skeletal structure, the cerebrum, the cerebellum, the coccyx,   
the larynx, the pancreas, the liver, the upper intestine and the lower intestine, the   
heart, the kidneys, the testicles, the womb, the Fallopian tubes, the whole god-damned   
works. The whole country is lawless, violent, explosive, demoniacal. It's in the air, in   
the climate, in the ultra-grandiose landscape, in the stone forests that are lying   
horizontal, in the torrential rivers that bite through the rocky canyons, in the supra- 
 23 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normal distances, the supernal arid wastes, the over-lush crops, the monstrous fruits, the   
mixture of quixotic bloods, the fatras of cults, sects, beliefs, the opposition of laws and   
languages, the contra-dictoriness of temperaments, principles, needs, requirements. The   
continent is full of buried violence, of the bones of antediluvian monsters and of lost   
races of man, of mysteries which are wrapped in doom. The atmosphere is at times so   
electrical that the soul is summoned out of its body and 
 
39 
 
runs amok. Like the rain everything comes in bucketsful - or not at all. The whole   
continent is a huge volcano whose crater is temporarily concealed by a moving panorama   
which is partly dream, partly fear, partly despair. From Alaska to Yucatan it's the same   
story. Nature dominates. Nature wins out. Everywhere the same fundamental urge to slay, to   
ravage, to plunder. Outwardly they seem like a fine, upstanding people - healthy,   
optimistic, courageous. Inwardly they are filled with worms. A tiny spark and they blow up.   
 
Often it happened, as in Russia, that a man came in with a chip on his shoulder. He woke up   
that way, as if struck by a monsoon. Nine times out often he was a good fellow, a fellow   
whom everybody liked. But when the rage came on nothing could stop him. He was like a horse   
with the blind staggers and the best thing you could do for him was to shoot him on the   
spot. It always happens that way with peaceable people. One day they run amok. In America   
they're constantly running amok. What they need is an outlet for their energy, for their   
blood lust. Europe is bled regularly by war. America is pacifistic and cannibalistic.   
Outwardly it seems to be a beautiful honeycomb, with all the drones crawling over each   
other in a frenzy of work; inwardly it's a slaughterhouse, each man killing off his   
neighbour and sucking the juice from his bones. Superficially it looks like a bold,   
masculine world; actually it's a whorehouse run by women, with the native sons acting as   
pimps and the bloody foreigners selling their flesh. Nobody knows what it is to sit on his   
ass    and    be    content.    That    happens    only    in    the    films    where    everything    is    faked,    even    the   
fires of hell. The whole continent is sound asleep and in that sleep a grand nightmare is   
taking place. 
 
Nobody could have slept more soundly than I in the midst of this nightmare. The war, when   
it came along, made only a sort of faint rumble in my ears. Like my compatriots, I was   
pacifistic and cannibalistic. The millions who were put away in the carnage passed away in   
a cloud, much like the Aztecs passed away, and the Incas and the red Indians and the   
buffaloes. People pretended to be profoundly moved, but they weren't. They were simply   
tossing fitfully in their sleep. No 
 
40 
 
one lost his appetite, no one got up and rang the fire alarm. The day I first realized that   
there had been a war was about six months or so after the armistice. It was in a street car   
on the 14th Street crosstown line. One of our heroes, a Texas lad with a string of medals   
 
 
 24 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
across    his    chest,    happened    to    see    an    officer    passing    on    the    sidewalk.    The    sight    of    the   
officer enraged him. He was a sergeant himself and he probably had good reason to be sore.   
Anyway, the sight of the officer enraged him so that he got up from his seat and began to   
bawl the shit out of the government, the army, the civilians, the passengers in the. car,   
everybody and everything. He said if there was ever another war they couldn't drag him to   
it with a twenty mule team. He said he'd see every son of a bitch killed before he'd go   
again himself; he said he didn't give a fuck about the medals they had decorated him with   
and to show that he meant it he ripped them off and threw them out the window; he said if   
he was ever in a trench with an officer again he'd shoot him in the back like a dirty dog,   
and that held good for General Pershing or any other general. He said a lot more, with some   
fancy cuss words that he'd picked up over there, and nobody opened his trap to gainsay him.   
And when he got through I felt for the first time that there had really been a war and that   
the man I was listening to had been in it and that despite his bravery the war had made him   
a coward and that if he did any more killing it would be wide-awake and in cold blood, and   
nobody would have the guts to send him to the electric chair because he had performed his   
duty towards his fellow men, which was to deny his own sacred instincts and so everything   
was just and fair because one crime washes away the other in the name of God, country and   
humanity, peace be with you all. And the second time I experienced the reality of war was   
when ex-sergeant Griswold, one of our night messengers, flew off the handle one day and   
smashed the office to bits at one of the railway stations. They sent him to me to give him   
the gate, but I didn't have the heart to fire him. He had performed such a beautiful piece   
of destruction that I felt more like hugging and squeezing him; I was only hoping to Christ   
he would go up the 25th floor, or wherever it was that the president and the 
 
41 
 
vice-presidents had their offices, and mop up the whole bloody gang. But in the name of   
discipline, and to uphold the bloody farce it was, I had to do something to punish him or   
be    punished for    it myself,    and so    not knowing    what less    I could    do I    took him    off the   
commission basis and put him back on a salary basis. He took it pretty badly, not realizing   
exactly where I stood, either for him or against him and so I got a letter from him pronto,   
saying that he was going to pay me a visit in a day or two and that I'd better watch out   
because he was going to take it out of my hide. He said he'd come up after office hours and   
that if I was afraid I'd better have some strong-arm men around to look after me. I knew he   
meant every word he said and I felt pretty damned quaky when I put the letter down. I   
waited in for him alone, however, feeling that it would be even more cowardly to ask for   
protection. It was a strange experience. He must have realized the moment he laid eyes on   
me that if I was a son of a bitch and a lying, stinking hypocrite, as he had called me in   
his letter, I was only that because he was, which wasn't a hell of a lot better. He must   
have realized immediately that we were both in the same boat and that the bloody boat was   
leaking pretty badly. I could see something like that going on in him as he strode forward,   
outwardly still furious, still foaming at the mouth, but inwardly all spent, all soft and   
feathery. As for myself, what fear I had vanished the moment I saw him enter. Just being   
there quiet and alone, and being less strong, less capable of defending myself, gave me the   
 25 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drop on him. Not that I wanted to have the drop on him either. But it had turned out that   
way and I took advantage of it, naturally. The moment he sat down he went soft as putty. He   
wasn't a man any more, but just a big child. There must have been millions of them like   
him, big children with machine guns who could wipe out whole regiments without batting an   
eyelash; but back in the work trenches, without a weapon, without a clear, visible enemy,   
they were helpless as ants. Everything revolved about the question of food. The food and   
the rent - that was all there was to fight about - but there was no way, no dear, visible   
way, to fight for it. It was like seeing an army strong and well equipped, capable of   
licking anything 
 
42 
 
in sight, and yet ordered to retreat every day, to retreat and retreat and retreat because   
that was the strategic thing to do, even though it meant losing ground, losing guns, losing   
ammunition, losing food, losing sleep, losing courage, losing life itself finally. Wherever   
there were men fighting for food and rent there was this retreat going on, in the fog, in   
the night, for no earthly reason except that it was the strategic thing to do. It was   
eating the heart out of him. To fight was easy, but to fight for food and rent was like   
fighting an army of ghosts. All you could do was to retreat, and while you retreated you   
watched your own brothers getting popped on, one after the other, silently, mysteriously,   
in the fog, in the dark, and not a thing to do about it. He was so damned confused, so   
perplexed, so hopelessly muddled and beaten, that he put his head in his arms and wept on   
my desk. And while he's sobbing like that suddenly the telephone rings and it's the vice- 
president's office - never the vice-president himself, but always his office -and they want   
this man Griswold fired immediately and I say Yes Sir! and I hang up. I don't say anything   
to Griswold about it but I walk home with him and I have dinner with him and his wife and   
kids. And when I leave him I say to myself that if I have to fire that guy somebody's going   
to pay for it - and anyway I want to know first where the order comes from and why. And hot   
and sullen I go right up to the vice-president's office in the morning and I ask to see the   
vice-president himself and did you give the order I ask -    and why?    And before he has a   
chance to deny it, or to explain his reason for it, I give him a little war stuff straight   
from the shoulder and where he don't like it and can't take it - and if you don't like it,   
Mr. Will Twilldilliger, you can take the job, my job and his job and you can shove them up   
your ass - and like that I walk out on him. I go back to the slaughterhouse and I go about   
my work as usual. I expect, of course, that I'll get the sack before the day's over. But   
nothing of the kind. No, to my amazement I get a telephone call from the general manager   
saying to take it easy, to just calm down a bit, yes, just go easy, don't do anything   
hasty, we'll look into it, etc. I guess they're still looking into it because Griswold went   
on working just as 
 
43 
 
always - in fact, they even promoted him to a clerkship, which was a dirty deal, too,   
because as a clerk he earned less money than as a messenger, but it saved his pride and it   
 26 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also took a little more of the spunk out of him too, no doubt. But that's what happens to a   
guy when he's just a hero in his sleep. Unless the nightmare is strong enough to wake you   
up you go right on retreating, and either you end up on a bench or you end up as vice- 
president. It's all one and the same, a bloody fucking mess, a farce, a fiasco from start   
to finish. I know it as I was in it, because I woke up. And when I woke up I walked out on   
it. I walked out by the same door that I had walked in - without as much as a by your   
leave, sir! 
 
Things take place instantaneously, but there's a long process to be gone through first.   
What you get when something happens is only the explosion, and the second before that the   
spark. But everything happens according to law - and with the full consent and   
collaboration of the whole cosmos. Before I could get up and explode the bomb had to be   
properly prepared, properly primed. After putting things in order for the bastards up above   
I had to be taken down from my high horse, had to be kicked around like a football, had to   
be stepped on, squelched, humiliated, fettered, manacled, made impotent as a jellyfish. All   
my life I have never wanted for friends, but at this particular period they seemed to   
spring up around me like mushrooms. I never had a moment to myself. If I went home of a   
night, hoping to take a rest, somebody would be there waiting to see me. Sometimes a gang   
of them would be there and it didn't seem to make much difference whether I came or not.   
Each set of friends I made despised the other set. Stanley, for example, despised the whole   
lot. Ulric too was rather scornful of the others. He had just come back from Europe after   
an absence of several years. We hadn't seen much of each other since boyhood and then one   
day, quite by accident, we met on the street. That day was an important day in my life   
because it opened up a new world to me, a world I had often dreamed about but never hoped   
to see. I remember vividly that we were standing on the comer of Sixth Avenue and 49th   
Street towards dusk. I remember it because it seemed 
 
44 
 
utterly incongruous to be listening to a man talking about Mt. Aetna and Vesuvius and Capri   
and Pompeii and M orocco and Paris on the comer of Sixth Avenue and 49th St., M anhattan. I   
remember the way he looked about as he talked, like a man who hadn't quite realized what he   
was in for but who vaguely sensed that he had made a horrible mistake in returning. His   
eyes seemed to be saying all the time - this has no value, no value whatever. He didn't say   
that, however, but just this over and over: "I'm sure you'd like it! I'm sure it's just the   
place for you." When he left me I was in a daze. I couldn't get hold of him again quickly   
enough. I wanted to hear it all over again, in minute detail. Nothing that I had read about   
Europe seemed to match this glowing account from my friend's own lips. It seemed all the   
more miraculous to me in that we had sprung out of the same environment. He had managed it   
because he had rich friends - and because he knew how to save his money. I had never known   
any one who was rich, who had travelled, who had money in the bank. All my friends were   
like myself, drifting from day to day, and never a thought for the future. O'Mara, yes, he   
had travelled a bit, almost all over the world - but as a bum, or eke in the army, which   
was even worse than being a bum. M y friend Ulric was the first fellow I had ever met whom I   
 27 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
Just a Brooklyn boy! That was an expression he used sometimes when 
 
 
 
 
could truly say had travelled. And he knew how to talk about his experiences. 
 
As    a    result    of    that    chance    encounter    on    the    street    we    met    frequently    thereafter,    for    a   
period of several months. He used to call for me in the evening after dinner and we would   
stroll through the park which was nearby. What a thirst I had! Every slightest detail about   
the other world fascinated me. Even now, years and years since, even now, when I know Paris   
like a book, his picture of Paris is still before my eyes, still vivid, still real.   
Sometimes after a rain, riding swiftly through the city in a taxi, I catch fleeting   
glimpses of this Paris he described; just momentary snatches, as in passing the Tuileries,   
perhaps, or a glimpse of M ontmartre, of the Sacre Coeur, through the Rue Laffite, in the   
last flush of twilight. 
 
45 
 
he felt ashamed of his inability to express himself more adequately. And I was just a   
Brooklyn boy, too, which is to say one of the last and the least of men. But as I wander   
about, rubbing elbows with the world, seldom it happens that I meet any one who can   
describe so lovingly and faithfully what he has seen and felt. Those nights in Prospect   
Park with my old friend Ulric are responsible, more than anything else, for my being here   
to-day. Most of the places he described for me I have still to see; some of them I shall   
perhaps never see. But they live inside me, warm and vivid, just as he created them in our   
rambles through the park. 
 
Interwoven with this talk of the other world was the whole body and texture of Lawrence's   
work. Often, when the park had long been emptied, we were still sitting on a bench   
discussing the nature of Lawrence's ideas. Looking back on these discussions now I can see   
how confused I was, how pitifully ignorant of the true meaning of Lawrence's words. Had I   
really understood, my life could never have taken the course it did. M ost of us live the   
greater part of our lives submerged. Certainly in my own case I can say that not until I   
left America did I emerge above the surface. Perhaps America had nothing to do with it, but   
the fact remains that I did not open my eyes wide and full and dear until I struck Paris.   
And perhaps that was only because I had renounced America, renounced my past. 
 
My friend Kronski used to twit me about my "euphorias". It was a sly way he had of   
reminding me, when I was extraordinarily gay, that the morrow would find me depressed. It   
was true. I had nothing but ups and downs. Long stretches of gloom and melancholy followed   
by extravagant bursts of gaiety, of trancelike inspiration. Never a level in which I was   
myself. It sounds strange to say so, yet I was never myself. I was either anonymous or the   
person called Henry M iller raised to the    nth degree. In the latter mood, for instance, I   
could spill out a whole book to Hymie while riding a trolleycar. Hymie, who never suspected   
me of being anything but a good employment manager. I can see his eyes now as he looked at   
me one night when I was in one of my states of "euphoria". 
 
46 
 
 
 28 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
We had boarded the trolley at the Brooklyn Bridge to go to some flat in Greenpoint where a   
couple of trollops were waiting to receive us. Hymie had started to talk to me in his usual   
way about his wife's ovaries. In the first place he didn't know precisely what ovaries   
meant and so I was explaining it to him in crude and simple fashion. In the midst of my   
explanation it suddenly seemed so profoundly tragic and ridiculous that Hymie shouldn't   
know what ovaries were that I became drunk, as drunk I mean as if I had a quart of whisky   
under my belt. From the idea of diseased ovaries there germinated in one lightning-like   
flash a sort of tropical growth made up of the most heterogeneous assortment of odds and   
ends in the midst of which, securely lodged, tenaciously lodged, I might say, were Dante   
and Shakespeare. At the same instant I also suddenly recalled my whole private train of   
thought which had begun about the middle of the Brooklyn Bridge and which suddenly the word   
"ovaries" had broken. I realized that everything Hymie had said up till the word "ovaries",   
had sieved through me like sand. What I had begun, in the middle of the Brooklyn Bridge,   
was what I had begun time and time again in the past, usually when walking to my father's   
shop, a performance which was repeated day in and day out as if in a trance. What I had   
begun, in brief, was a book of the hours, of the tedium and monotony of my life in the   
midst of a ferocious activity. Not for years had I thought of this book which I used to   
write every day on my way from Delancey Street to M urray Hill. But going over the bridge   
the sun setting, the skyscrapers gleaming like phosphorescent cadavers, the remembrance of   
the past set in ... remembrance of going back and forth over the bridge, going to a job   
which was death, returning to a home which was a morgue, memorizing Faust looking down into   
the cemetery, spitting into the cemetery from the elevated train, the same guard on the   
platform every morning, an imbecile, the other imbeciles reading their newspapers, new   
skyscrapers going up, new tombs to work in and die in, the boats passing below, the Fall   
River Line, the Albany Day Line, why am I going to work, what will I do to-night, the warm   
cunt beside me and can I work my knuckles into her groin, run away 
 
47 
 
and become a cowboy, try Alaska, the gold mines, get off and turn around, don't die yet,   
wait another day, a stroke of luck, river, end it, down, down, like a corkscrew, head and   
shoulders    in    the    mud,    legs    free,    fish    will    come    and    bite,    to-morrow    a    new    life,    where,   
anywhere, why begin again, the same thing everywhere, death, death is the solution, but   
don't die yet, wait another day, a stroke of luck, a new face, a new friend, millions of   
chances, you're too young yet, you're melancholy, you don't die yet, wait another day, a   
stroke of luck, fuck anyway, and so on over the bridge into the glass shed, everybody glued   
together, worms, ants, crawling out of a dead tree and their thoughts crawling out the same   
way . . . Maybe, being up high between the two shores, suspended above the traffic, above   
life and death, on each side the high tombs, tombs blazing with dying sunlight, the river   
flowing heedlessly, flowing on like time itself, maybe each time I passed up there,   
something was tugging away at me, urging me to take it in, to announce myself, anyway each   
time I passed on high I was truly alone, and whenever that happened the book commenced to   
write itself, screaming the things which I never breathed, the thoughts I never uttered,   
the conversations I never held, the hopes, the dreams, the delusions I never admitted. If   
 29 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this then was the true self it was marvellous, and what's more it seemed never to change   
but always to pick up from the last stop to continue in the same vein, a vein I had struck   
when I was a child and went down in the street for the first time alone and there frozen in   
the dirty ice of the gutter lay a dead cat, the first time I had looked at death and   
grasped it. From that moment I knew what it was to be isolated: every object, every living   
thing and every dead thing led its independent existence. My thoughts too led an   
independent existence. Suddenly, looking at Hymie and thinking of that strange word   
"ovaries", now stranger than any word in my whole vocabulary, this feeling of icy isolation   
came over me and Hymie sitting beside me was a bull-frog, absolutely a bull-frog and   
nothing more. I was jumping from the bridge head first, down into the primeval ooze, the   
legs dear and waiting for a bite; like that Satan had plunged through the heavens, through   
the solid 
 
48 
 
core of the earth, head down and ramming through to the very hub of the earth, the darkest,   
densest, hottest pit of hell. I was walking through the M ojave Desert and the man beside me   
was waiting for nightfall in order to fall on me and slay me. I was walking again in   
Dreamland and a man was walking above me on a tightrope and above him a man was sitting in   
an aeroplane spelling letters of smoke in the sky. The woman hanging on my arm was pregnant   
and in six or seven years the thing she was carrying inside her would be able to read the   
letters in the sky and he or she or it would know that it was a cigarette and later would   
smoke the cigarette, perhaps a package a day. In the womb nails formed on every finger,   
every toe; you could stop right there, at a toe nail, the tiniest toe nail imaginable and   
you could break your head over it, trying to figure it out. On one side of the ledger are   
the books man has written, containing such a hodge-podge of wisdom and nonsense, of truth   
and falsehood, that if one lived to be as old as M ethuselah one couldn't disentangle the   
mess; on the other side of the ledger things like toe nails, hair, teeth, blood, ovaries,   
if you will, all incalculable and all written in another kind of ink, in another script, an   
incomprehensible, undecipherable script. The bull-frog eyes were trained on me like two   
collar buttons stuck in cold fat; they were stuck in the cold sweat of the primeval ooze.   
Each collar button was an ovary that had come unglued, an illustration out of the   
dictionary without benefit of lucubration; lacklustre in the cold yellow fat of the eyeball   
each buttoned ovary produced a subterranean chill, the skating rink of hell where men stood   
upside down in the ice, the legs free and waiting for a bite. Here Dante walked   
unaccompanied, weighed down by his vision, and through endless circles gradually moving   
heavenward to be enthroned in his work. Here Shakespeare with smooth brow fell into the   
bottomless reverie of rage to emerge in elegant quartos and innuendoes. A glaucous frost of   
non-comprehension swept dear by gales of laughter. From the hub of the bull-frog's eye   
radiated dean white spokes of sheer lucidity not to be annotated or categorized, not to be   
numbered or defined, but revolving sightless in kaleidoscopic change. Hymie the bull-frog   
was an 
 
49 
 30 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ovarian spud generated in the high passage between two shores: for him the skyscrapers had   
been built, the wilderness cleared, the Indians massacred, the buffaloes exterminated; for   
him the twin dries had been joined by the Brooklyn Bridge, the caissons sunk, the cables   
strung from tower to tower; for him men sat upside down in the sky writing words in fire   
and smoke; for him the anaesthetic was invented and the high forceps and the big Bertha   
which could destroy what the eye could not see; for him the molecule was broken down and   
the atom revealed to be without substance; for him each night the stars were swept with   
telescopes and worlds coming to birth photographed in the act of gestation; for him the   
barriers of time and space were set at nought and all movement, be it the flight of birds   
or the revolution of the planets, expounded irrefutably and incontestably by the high   
priests of the de-possessed cosmos. Then, as in the middle of the bridge, in the middle of   
a walk, in the middle always, whether of a book, a conversation, or making love, it was   
borne in on me again that I had never done what I wanted and out of not doing what I wanted   
to do there grew up inside me this creation which was nothing but an obsessional plant, a   
sort of coral growth, which was expropriating everything, including life itself, until life   
itself became this which was denied but which constantly asserted itself, making life and   
killing life at the same time. I could see it going on after death, like hair growing on a   
corpse, people saying "death" but the hair still testifying to life, and finally no death   
but this life of hair and nails, the body gone, the spirit quenched, but in the death   
something still alive, expropriating space, causing time, creating endless movement.   
Through love this night happen, or sorrow, or being born with a dub foot; the cause   
nothing, the event everything.    In the beginning was the Word    . .. Whatever this was,    the   
Word, disease or creation, it was still running rampant; it would run on and on, outstrip   
time and space, outlast the angels, unseat God, unhook the universe. Any word contained all   
words - for him who had become detached through love or sorrow or whatever the cause. In   
every word the current ran back to the beginning which was lost and which would  
 
50 
 
never be found again since there was neither beginning nor end but only that which   
expressed itself in beginning and end. So, on the ovarian trolley there was this voyage of   
man and bull-frog composed of identical stuff, neither better nor less than Dante but   
infinitely different, the one not knowing precisely the meaning of anything, the other   
knowing too precisely the meaning of everything, hence both lost and confused through   
beginnings and endings, finally to be deposited at Java or India Street, Greenpoint, there   
to be carried back into the current of life, so-called, by a couple of sawdust moils with   
twitching ovaries of the well-known gastropod variety. 
 
What strikes me now as the most wonderful proof of my fitness, or unfitness, for the times   
is the fact that nothing people were writing or talking about had any real interest for me.   
Only the object haunted me, the separate detached, insignificant thing. It might be a part   
of the human body or a staircase in a vaudeville house; it might be a smokestack or a   
button I had found in the gutter. Whatever it was it enabled me to open up, to surrender,   
to attach my signature. To the life about me, to the people who made up the world I knew, I   
 31 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could not attach my signature. I was as definitely outside their world as a cannibal is   
outside the bounds of civilized society. I was filled with a perverse love of the thing-in- 
itself-not a philosophic attachment, but a passionate, desperately passionate hunger, as if   
in the discarded, worthless thing which everyone ignored there was contained the secret of   
my own regeneration. 
 
Living in the midst of a world where there was a plethora of the new I attached myself to   
the old. In every object there was a minute particle which particularly claimed my   
attention. I had a microscopic eye for the blemish, for the grain of ugliness which to me   
constituted the sole beauty of the object. Whatever set the object apart, or made it   
unserviceable, or gave it a date, attracted and endeared it to me. If this was perverse it   
was also healthy, considering that I was not destined to belong to this world which was   
springing    up    about    me.    Soon    I    too    would    become    like    these    objects    which    I    venerated,    a   
thing apart, a non-useful member of society. I was definitely dated, that was 
 
51 
 
certain. And yet I was able to amuse, to instruct, to nourish. But never to be accepted, in   
a genuine way. When I wished to, when I had the itch, I could single out any man, in any   
stratum of society, and make him listen to me. I could hold him spellbound, if I chose,   
but, like a magician, or a sorcerer, only as long as the spirit was in me. At bottom I   
sensed in others a distrust, an uneasiness, an antagonism which, because it was   
instinctive, was irremediable. I should have been a clown; 
 
it would have afforded me the widest range of expression. But I underestimated the   
profession. Had I become a clown, or even a vaudeville entertainer, I would have been   
famous. People would have appreciated me precisely because they would not have understood;   
but they would have understood that I was not to be understood. That would have been a   
relief, to say the least. 
 
It was always a source of amazement to me how easily people could become rued just   
listening to me talk. Perhaps my speech was somewhat extravagant, though often it happened   
when I was holding myself in with main force. The turn of a phrase, the choice of an   
unfortunate adjective, the facility with which the words came to my Ups, the allusions to   
subjects which were taboo - everything conspired to set me off as an outlaw, as an enemy to   
society. No matter how well things began sooner or later they smelled me out. If I were   
modest and humble, for example, then I was too modest, too humble. If I were gay and   
spontaneous,    bold    and    reckless,    then    I    was    too    free,    too    gay.    I    could    never    get    myself   
quite au point with the individual I happened to be talking to. If it were not a question   
of life and death - everything was life and death to me then - if it was merely a question   
of    passing    a    pleasant    evening    at    the    home    of    some    acquaintance,    it    was    the    same    thing.   
There were vibrations emanating from me, overtones and undertones, which charged the   
atmosphere unpleasantly. Perhaps the whole evening they had been amused by my stories,   
perhaps I had them in stitches, as it often happened, and everything seemed to augur well.   
 
 
 32 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
But sure as fate something was bound to happen before the evening came to a dose, some   
vibration set loose which made the chandelier ring or 
 
52 
 
which reminded some sensitive soul of the piss-pot under the bed. Even while the laughter   
was still drying off the venom was beginning to make itself felt. "Hope to see you again   
some time", they would say, but the wet, limp hand which was extended would belie the   
words. 
 
Persona mm grata! Jesus, how clear it seems to me now! No pick and choice possible: I had   
to take what was to hand and leam to like it. I had to learn to live with the scum, to swim   
like a sewer-rat or be drowned. If you elect to join the herd you are immune. To be   
accepted    and    appreciated    you    must    nullify    yourself,    make    yourself    indistinguishable    from   
the herd. You may dream, if you are dreaming simultaneously . But if you dream something   
different    you    are    not    in    America,    of    America    American,    but    a    Hottentot    in    Africa,    or    a   
Kalmuck,    or    a    chimpanzee.    The    moment    you    have    a    "different"    thought    you    cease    to    be    an   
American. And the moment you become something different you find yourself in Alaska or   
Easter Island or Iceland. 
 
Am I saying this with rancour, with envy, with malice? Perhaps. Perhaps I regret not having   
been able to become an American.    Perhaps.    In my zeal now, which is again    American,    I am   
about to give birth to a monstrous edifice, a skyscraper, which will last undoubtedly long   
after the other skyscrapers have vanished, but which will vanish too when that which   
produced it disappears. Everything American will disappear one day, more completely than   
that which was Greek, or Roman, or Egyptian. This is    one    of    the    ideas    which    pushed    me   
outside the warm, comfortable bloodstream where, buffaloes all, we once grazed in peace. An   
idea that has caused me infinite sorrow, for not to belong to something enduring is the   
last agony. But I am not a buffalo and I have no desire to be one. I am not even    a   
spiritual buffalo. I have slipped away to rejoin an older stream of consciousness, a race   
antecedent to the buffaloes, a race that will survive the buffalo. 
 
All things, all objects animate or inanimate that are    different,    are veined with   
ineradicable traits. What is me is ineradicable, because it is different. This is a   
skyscraper, as I said, but it is    different    from the usual skyscraper a 1'americaine. In   
this sky" 
 
53 
 
scraper there are no elevators, no 73rd story windows to jump from. If you get tired of   
climbing you are shit out of luck. There is no slot directory in the main lobby. If you are   
search-ing for somebody you will have to search. If you want a drink you will have to go   
out and get it; there are no soda fountains in this building, and no cigar stores, and no   
telephone booths. All the other skyscrapers have what you want! this one contains nothing   
 
 
 33 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
but what I want, what I like. And somewhere in this skyscraper Valeska has her being, and   
we're going to get to her when the spirit moves me. For the time being she's all right,   
Valeska, seeing as how she's six feet under and by now perhaps picked dean by the worms.   
When she was in the flesh she was picked dean too, by the human worms who have no respect   
for anything which has a different tint, a different odour. 
 
The sad thing about Valeska was the fact that she had nigger blood in her veins. It was   
depressing for everybody around her. She made you aware of it whether you wished to be or   
not. The nigger blood, as I say, and the fact that her mother was a trollop. The mother was   
white of course. Who the father was nobody knew, not even Valeska herself.  
 
Everything was going along smoothly until the day an officious little Jew from the vice- 
president's office happened to espy her. He was horrified, so he informed me   
confidentially, to think that I had employed a coloured person as my secretary. He spoke as   
though she might contaminate the messengers. The next day I was put on the carpet. It was   
exactly as though I had committed sacrilege. Of course, I pretended that I hadn't observed   
anything unusual about her, except that she was extremely intelligent and extremely   
capable. Finally the president himself stepped in. There was a short interview between him   
and Valeska during which he very diplomatically proposed to give her a better position in   
Havana. No talk of the blood taint. Simply that her services had been altogether remarkable   
and that they would like to promote her - to Havana. Valeska came back to the office in a   
rage. When she was angry she was magnificent. She said she wouldn't budge. Steve Romero and   
Hymie were there at the time and we all 
 
54 
 
went out to dinner together. During the course of the evening we got a bit tight. Valeska's   
tongue was wagging. On the way home she told me that she was going to put up a fight; she   
wanted to know if it would endanger my job. I told her quietly that if she were fired I   
would quit too. She pretended not to believe it at first. I said I meant it, that I didn't   
care what happened. She seemed to be unduly impressed, she took me by the two hands and she   
held them very gently, the tears rolling down her cheeks. 
 
That was the beginning of things. I think it was the very next day that I slipped her a   
note saying that I was crazy about her. She read the note sitting opposite me and when she   
was through she looked me square in the eye and said she didn't believe it. But we went to   
dinner again that night and we had more to drink and we danced and while we were dancing   
she pressed herself against me lasciviously. It was just the time, as luck would have it,   
that my wife was getting ready to have another abortion. I was telling Valeska about it as   
we danced. On the way home she suddenly said - "why don't you let me lend you a hundred   
dollars?" The next night I brought her home to dinner and I let her hand the wife the   
hundred dollars. I was amazed how well the two of them got along. Before the evening was   
over it was agreed upon that Valeska would come to the house the day of the abortion and   
take care of the kid. The day came and I gave Valeska the afternoon off. About an hour   
 34 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after she had left I suddenly decided that I would take the afternoon off also. I started   
towards the burlesque on Fourteenth Street. When I was about a block from the theatre I   
suddenly changed my mind. It was just the thought that if anything happened - if the wife   
were to kick-off- I wouldn't feel so damned good having spent the afternoon at the   
burlesque. I walked around a bit, in and out of the penny arcades, and then I started   
homeward. 
 
It's strange how things turn out. Trying to amuse the kid I suddenly remembered a trick my   
grandfather had shown me when I was a child. You take the dominoes and you make tall   
battleships out of them; then you gently pull the tablecloth on which the battleships are   
floating until they come to the edge 
 
55 
 
of the table when suddenly you give a brisk tug and they fall on to the floor. We tried it   
over and over again, the three of us, until the kid got so sleepy that she toddled off to   
the next room and fell asleep. The dominoes were lying all over the floor and the   
tablecloth was on the floor too. Suddenly Valeska was leaning against the table, her tongue   
halfway down my throat, my hand between her legs. As I laid her back on the table she   
twined her legs around me. I could feel one of the dominoes under my feet - part of the   
fleet that we had destroyed a dozen times or more. I thought of my grandfather sitting on   
the bench, the way he had warned my mother one day that I was too young to be reading so   
much, the pensive look in his eyes as he pressed the hot iron against the wet seam of a   
coat; I thought of the attack on San Juan Hill which the Rough Riders had made, the picture   
of: Teddy .charging at the head of his volunteers in    the    big book which I used to read   
beside the workbench; I thought of the battleship Maine that floated over my bed in the   
little room with the iron-barred window, and of Admiral Dewey and of Schley and Sampson; I   
thought of the trip to the Navy Yard which I never made because on the way my father   
suddenly remembered that we had to call on the doctor that afternoon and when I left the   
doctor's office I didn't have any more tonsils nor any more faith in human beings ... We   
had hardly finished when the bell rang and it was my wife coming home from the slaughter   
house. I was still buttoning my fly as I went through the hall to open the gate. She was as   
white as flour. She looked as though she'd never be able to go through another one. We put   
her to bed and then we gathered up the dominoes and put the tablecloth back on the table.   
Just the other night in a bistrot, as I was going to the toilet, I happened to pass two old   
fellows playing dominoes. I had to stop a moment and pick up a domino. The feeling of it   
immediately brought back the battleships, the clatter they made when they fell on the   
floor. And with the battleships my lost tonsils and my faith in human beings gone. So that   
every time I walked over the Brooklyn Bridge and looked down towards the Navy Yard I felt   
as though my guts were dropping out. Way up there, suspended between the two shores, 
 
56 
 
I felt always as though I were hanging over a void; up there everything that had ever   
 35 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
happened to me seemed unreal, and worse than unreal - unnecessary. Instead of joining me to   
life, to men, to the activity of men, the bridge seemed to break all connections. If I   
walked towards the one shore or the other it made no difference: either way was hell.   
Somehow    I    had    managed    to    sever    my    connection    with    the    world    that    human    hands    and    human   
minds were creating. Perhaps my grandfather was right, perhaps I was spoiled in the bud by   
the books I read. But it is ages since books have claimed me. For a long time now I have   
practically ceased to read. But the taint is still there. Now people are books to me. I   
read them from cover to cover and toss them aside. I devour them, one after the other. And   
the more I read, the more insatiable I become. There is no limit to it. There could be no   
end, and there was none, until inside me a bridge began to form which united me again with   
the current of life from which as a child I had been separated. 
 
A terrible sense of desolation. It hung over me for years. If I were to believe in the   
stars I should have to believe that I was completely under the reign of Saturn. Everything   
that happened to me happened too late to mean much to me. It was even so with my birth.   
Slated for Christmas I was born a half hour too late. It always seemed to me that I was   
meant to be the sort of individual that one is destined to be by virtue of being born on   
the 25th day of December. Admiral Dewey was born on that day and so was Jesus Christ . . .   
perhaps Krishnamurti too, for all I know. Anyway that's the sort of guy I was intended to   
be. But due to the fact that my mother had a clutching womb, that she held me in her grip   
like an octopus, I came out under another configuration - with a bad set-up, in other   
words. They say - the astrologers, I mean -that it will get better and better for me as I   
go on; the future in fact, is supposed to be quite glorious. But what do I care about the   
future? It would have been better if my mother had tripped on the stairs the morning of the   
25th of December and broken her neck: that would have given me a fair start! When I try to   
think, therefore, of where the break occurred I keep putting 
 
57 
 
it back further and further, until there is no other way of accounting for it than by the   
retarded hour of birth. Even my mother, with her caustic tongue, seemed to understand it   
somewhat. "Always dragging behind, like a cow's tail" - that's how she characterized me.   
But is it my fault that she held me locked inside her until the hour had passed? Destiny   
had prepared me to be such and such a person; the stars were in the right conjunction and I   
was right with the stars and kicking to get out. But I had no choice about the mother who   
was to deliver me. Perhaps I was lucky not to have been born an idiot, considering all the   
circumstances. One thing seems clear, however - and this is a hangover from the 25th - that   
I was born with a crucifixion complex. That is, to be more precise, I was born a fanatic.   
Fanatic!    I remember that word being hurled at me from early childhood on. By my parents   
especially. What is a fanatic? One who believes passionately and acts desperately upon what   
he believes. I was always believing in something and so getting into trouble. The more my   
hands were slapped the more firmly I believed. / believed - and the rest of the world did   
not! If it were only a question of enduring punishment one could go on believing till the   
end; but the way of the world is more insidious than that. Instead of being punished you   
 36 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are undermined, hollowed out, the ground taken from under your feet. It isn't even   
treachery, what I have in mind. Treachery is understandable and combatable. No, it is   
something worse, something    less    than treachery. It's a negativism that causes you to   
overreach yourself. You are perpetually spending your energy in the act of balancing   
yourself. You are seized with a sort of spiritual vertigo, you totter on the brink, your   
hair stands on end, you can't believe that beneath your feet lies an immeasurable abyss. It   
comes about through excess of enthusiasm, through a passionate desire to embrace people, to   
show them your love. The more you reach out towards the world the more the world retreats.   
Nobody wants real love, real hatred. Nobody wants you to put your hand in his sacred   
entrails - that's only for the priest in the hour of sacrifice. While you live, while the   
blood's still warm, you are to pretend that there is no such thing as blood and no such  
 
58 
 
things as a skeleton beneath the covering of flesh. Keep off the grass! That's the motto by   
which people live. 
 
If you continue this balancing at the edge of the abyss long enough you become very very   
adept: no matter which way you are pushed you always right yourself. Being in constant trim   
you develop a ferocious gaiety, an unnatural gaiety, I might say. There are only two   
peoples in the world to-day who understand the meaning of such a statement - the Jews and   
the Chinese. If it happens that you are neither of these you find yourself in a strange   
predicament. You are always laughing at the wrong moment; you are considered cruel and   
heartless when in reality you are only tough and durable. But if you would laugh when   
others laugh and weep when they weep then you must be prepared to die as they die and live   
as they live. That means to be right and to get the worst of it at the same time. It means   
to be dead while you are alive and alive only when you are dead. In this company the world   
always wears a normal aspect, even under the most abnormal conditions. Nothing is right or   
wrong but thinking makes it so. You no longer believe in reality but in thinking. And when   
you are pushed off the dead end your thoughts go with you and they are of no use to you. 
 
In    a way,    in a    profound way,    I mean,    Christ was    never pushed    off the    dead end.    At the   
moment when he was tottering and swaying as if by a great recoil, this negative backwash   
rolled up and stayed his death. The whole negative impulse of humanity seemed to coil up   
into a monstrous inert mass to create the human integer, the figure one, one and   
indivisible. There was a resurrection which is inexplicable unless we accept the fact that   
men have always been willing and ready to deny their own destiny. The earth rolls on, the   
stars roll on, but men: 
 
the great body of men which makes up the world, are caught in the image of the one and only   
one. 
 
If one isn't crucified, like Christ, if one manages to survive, to go on living above and   
beyond the sense of desperation and futility, then another curious thing happens. It's as   
 
 
 37 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
though one had actually died and actually been resurrected again, one lives a super-normal   
life, like the Chinese. That is to say, one is 
 
59 
 
unnaturally    gay,    unnaturally    healthy,    unnaturally    indifferent.    The    tragic    sense    is    gone:   
one lives on like a flower, a rock, a tree, one with Nature and against Nature at the same   
time. If your best friend dies you don't even bother to go to the funeral; if a man is run   
down by a street car right before your eyes you keep on walking just as though nothing had   
happened; 
 
if a war breaks out you let your friends go to the front but you yourself take no interest   
in the slaughter. And so on and so on. Life becomes a spectacle and, if you happen to be an   
artist, you record the passing show. Loneliness is abolished, because all values, your own   
included, are destroyed. Sympathy alone flourishes, but it is not a human sympathy, a   
limited    sympathy    -    it    is    something    monstrous    and    evil.    You    care    so    little    that    you    can   
afford to sacrifice yourself for anybody or anything. At the same time your interest, your   
curiosity, develops at an outrageous pace. This tool is suspect, since it is capable of   
attaching you to a collar button just as well as to a cause. There is no fundamental,   
unalterable difference between things: all is flux, all is perishable. The surface of your   
being is constantly crumbling; within however you grow hard as a diamond. And perhaps it is   
this hard, magnetic core inside you which attracts others to you willy-nilly. One thing is   
certain, that when you die and are resurrected you belong to the earth and whatever is of   
the earth is yours inalienably. You become an anomaly of nature, a being without shadow; 
 
you will never die again but only pass away like the phenomena about you. 
 
Nothing    of this    which I    am now    recording was    known to    me at    the time    that I    was going   
through the great change. Everything I endured was in the nature of a preparation for that   
moment when, putting on my hat one evening, I walked out of the office, out of my hitherto   
private life, and sought the woman who was to liberate me from a living death. In the light   
of this I look back now upon my nocturnal rambles through the streets of New York, the   
white nights when I walked in my sleep and saw the city in which I was born as one sees   
things in a mirage. Often it was O'Rourke, the company detective, whom I accompanied   
through the silent streets. Often the 
 
60 
 
snow was on the ground and the air chill frost. And O'Rourke talking interminably about   
thefts, about murders, about love, about human nature, about the Golden Age. He had a   
habit, when he was well launched upon a subject of stopping suddenly in the middle of the   
street and planting his heavy foot between mine so that I couldn't budge. And then, seizing   
the lapel of my coat, he would bring his face dose to mine and talk into my eyes, each word   
boring in like the turn of a gimlet. I can see again the two of us standing in the middle   
 
 
 38 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
of a street at four in the morning, the wind howling, the snow blowing down, and O'Rourke   
oblivious of everything but the story he had to get off his chest. Always as he talked I   
remember taking in the surroundings out of the comer of my eye, being aware not of what he   
was saying but of the two of us standing in Yorkville or on Alien Street or on Broadway.   
Always it seemed a little crazy to me, the earnestness with which he recounted his banal   
murder stories in the midst of the greatest muddle of architecture that man had ever   
created. While he was talking about finger-prints I might be taking stock of a coping or a   
cornice on a little red brick building just back of his black hat, I would get to thinking   
of the day the cornice had been installed, who might be the man who had designed it and why   
had he made it so ugly, so like every other lousy, rotten cornice which we passed from the   
East Side up to Harlem and beyond Harlem, if we wanted to push on, beyond New York, beyond   
the M ississippi, beyond the Grand Canyon, beyond the M ojave Desert, everywhere in America   
where there are buildings for man and woman. It seemed absolutely crazy to me that each day   
of my life I had to sit and listen to other people's stories, the banal tragedies of   
poverty and distress, of love and death, of yearning and disillusionment. If, as it   
happened, there came to me each day at least fifty men, each pouring out his tale of woe,   
and with each one I had to be silent and "receive", it was only natural that at some point   
along the line I had to close my ears, had to harden my heart. The tiniest little morsel   
was    sufficient for    me, I    could chew    on it    and digest    it for    days and    weeks. Yet    I was   
obliged to sit there and be inundated, to get out at night again and receive more, to 
 
61 
 
sleep listening, to dream listening. They streamed in from all over the world, from every   
strata of society, speaking a thousand different tongues, worshipping different gods,   
obeying different laws and customs. The tale of the poorest among them with a huge tome,   
and yet if each and every one were written out at length it might all be compressed to the   
size of the ten commandments, it might all be recorded on the back of a postage stamp, like   
the Lord's Prayer. Each day I was so stretched that my hide seemed to cover the whole   
world; and when I was alone, when I was no longer obliged to listen, I shrank to the size   
of a pinpoint. The greatest delight, and it was a rare one, was to walk the streets   
alone ... to walk the streets at night when no one was abroad and to reflect on the silence   
that surrounded me. Millions lying on their backs, dead to the world, their mouths wide   
open and nothing but snores emanating from them. Walking amidst the craziest architecture   
ever invented, wondering why and to what end, if every day from these wretched hovels or   
magnificent palaces there had to stream forth an army of men itching to unravel their tale   
of misery. In a year, reckoning it modestly, I received twenty-five thousand tales; in two   
years fifty thousand; in four years it would be a hundred thousand; in ten years I would be   
stark mad. Already I knew enough people to populate a good-sized town. What a town it would   
be, if only they could be gathered together! Would they want skyscrapers? Would they want   
museums? Would they want libraries? Would they too build sewers and bridges and tracks and   
factories? Would they make the same little cornices of tin, one like another, on, on, ad   
infinitum, from Battery Park to the Golden Bay? I doubt it. Only the lash of hunger could   
stir them. The empty belly, the wild look in the eye, the fear, the fear of worse, driving   
 39 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them on. One after the other, all the same, all goaded to desperation, out of the goad and   
whip of hunger building the loftiest skyscrapers, the most redoubtable dreadnoughts, making   
the finest steel, the flimsiest lace, the most delicate glassware. Walking with O'Rourke   
and hearing nothing but theft, arson, rape, homicide was like listening to a little motif   
out of a grand symphony. And just as one can whistle an air  
 
62 
 
of Bach and be thinking of a woman he wants to sleep with, so, listening to O'Rourke, I   
would be thinking of the moment when he would stop talking and say "what'll you have to   
eat?" In the midst of the most gruesome murder I could think of the pork tenderloin which   
we would be sure to get at a certain place farther up the line and wonder too what sort of   
vegetables they would have on the side to go with it, and whether I would order pie   
afterwards or a custard pudding. It was the same when I slept with my wife now and then;   
while she was moaning and gibbering I might be wondering if she had emptied the grounds in   
the coffee pot, because she had the bad habit of letting things slide - the    important   
things, I mean. Fresh coffee was important - and fresh bacon with eggs. If she were knocked   
up again that would be bad, serious in a way, but more important than that was fresh coffee   
in the morning and the smell of bacon and eggs. I could put up with heartbreaks and   
abortions and busted romances, but I had to have something under my belt to carry on, and I   
wanted something nourishing, something appetizing. I felt exactly like Jesus Christ would   
have felt if he had been taken down from the cross and not permitted to die in the flesh. I   
am sure that the shock of crucifixion would have been so great that he would have suffered   
a complete amnesia as regards humanity. I am certain that after his wounds had healed he   
wouldn't have given a damn about the tribulations of mankind but would have fallen with the   
greatest relish upon a fresh cup of coffee and a slice of toast, assuming he could have had   
it. 
 
Whoever, through too great love, which is monstrous after all, dies of his misery, is born   
again to know neither love nor hate, but to enjoy. And this joy of living, because it is   
unnaturally acquired, is a poison which eventually vitiates the whole world. Whatever is   
created beyond the normal limits of human suffering, acts as a boomerang and brings about   
destruction. At night the streets of New York reflect the crucifixion and death of Christ.   
When the snow is on the ground and there is the utmost silence there comes out of the   
hideous buildings of New York a music of such sullen despair and bankruptcy as to make the   
flesh shrivel. No stone was 
 
63 
 
laid upon another with love or reverence; no street was laid for dance or joy. One thing   
has been added to another in a mad scramble to fill the belly, and the streets smell of   
empty bellies and full bellies and bellies half full. The streets smell of a hunger which   
has nothing to do with love; they smell of the belly which is insatiable and of the   
creations of the empty belly which are null and void. 
 
 40 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this null and void, in this zero whiteness, I learned to enjoy a sandwich, or a collar   
button. I could study a cornice or a coping with the greatest curiosity while pretending to   
listen to a tale of human woe. I can remember the dates on certain buildings and the names   
of the architects who designed them. I can remember the temperature and the velocity of the   
wind, standing at a certain comer; the tale that accompanied it is gone. I can remember   
that I was even then remembering something else, and I can tell you what it was that I was   
then remembering, but of what use? There was one man in me which had died and all that was   
left were his remembrances; 
 
there was another man who was alive, and that man was supposed to be me, myself, but he was   
alive only as a tree is alive, or a rock, or a beast of the field. Just as the city itself   
had become a huge tomb in which men struggled to earn a decent death so my own life came to   
resemble a tomb which I was constructing out of my own death. I was walking around in a   
stone forest the centre of which was chaos; sometimes in the dead centre, in the very heart   
of chaos, I danced or drank myself silly, or I made love, or I befriended some one, or I   
planned    a    new    life,    but    it    was    all    chaos,    all    stone,    and    all    hopeless    and    bewildering.   
Until the time when I would encounter a force strong enough to whirl me out of this mad   
stone forest no life would be possible for me nor could one page be written which would   
have meaning. Perhaps in reading this, one has still the impression of chaos but this is   
written from a live centre and what is chaotic is merely peripheral, the tangental shreds,   
as it were, of a world which no longer concerns me. Only a few months ago I was standing in   
the streets of New York looking about me as years ago I had looked about me; 
 
again I found myself studying the architecture, studying the 
 
64 
 
minute details which only the dislocated eye takes in. But this time it was like coming   
down from Mars. What race of men is this, I asked myself. What does it mean? And there was   
no remembrance of suffering or of the life that was snuffed out in the gutter, only that I   
was looking upon a strange and incomprehensible world, a world so removed from me that I   
had the sensation of belonging to another planet. From the top of the Empire State Building   
I looked down one night upon the city which I knew from below: there they were, in true   
perspective, the human ants with whom I had crawled, the human lice with whom I had   
struggled. They were moving along at a snail's pace, each one doubtless fulfilling his   
micro-cosmic destiny. In their fruitless desperation they had reared this colossal edifice   
which was their pride and boast. And from the topmost ceiling of this colossal edifice they   
had suspended a string of cages in which the imprisoned canaries warbled their senseless   
warble. At the very summit of their ambition there were these little spots of beings   
warbling away for dear life. In a hundred years, I thought to myself perhaps they would be   
caging live human beings, gay, demented ones who would sing about the world to come.   
Perhaps they would breed a race of warblers who would warble while the others worked.   
Perhaps in every cage there would be a poet or a musician so that life below might flow on   
unimpeded, one with the stone, one with the forest, a rippling creaking chaos of null and   
 41 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
void. In a thousand years they might all be demented, workers and poets alike, and   
everything fall back to ruin as has happened again and again. Another thousand years, or   
five    thousand,    or    ten    thousand,    exactly    where    I    am    standing    now    to    survey    the    scene,    a   
little boy may open a book in a tongue as yet unheard of and about this life now passing, a   
life    which    the    man    who    wrote    the    book    never    experienced,    a    life    with    deducted    form    and   
rhythm, with beginning and end, and the boy on dosing the book will think to himself what a   
great race the Americans were, what a marvellous life there had once been on this continent   
which he is now inhabiting. No race to come, except perhaps the race of blind poets, will   
ever be able to imagine the seething chaos out of which this future history was composed. 
 
65 
 
Chaos! A howling chaos! No need to choose a particular day. Any day of my life - back there   
- would suit. Every day of my life, my tiny, microcosmic life, was a reflection of the   
outer chaos. Let me think back ... At seven-thirty the alarm went off. I didn't bounce out   
of bed. I lay there till eight-thirty, trying to gain a little more sleep. Sleep - how   
could I sleep? In the back of my mind was an image of the office where I was already due. I   
could see Hymie arriving at eight sharp, the switchboard already buzzing with demands for   
help, the applicants climbing up the wide wooden stairway, the strong smell of camphor from   
the dressing room. Why get up and repeat yesterday's song and dance? As fast as I hired   
them they dropped out. Working my balls off and not even a clean shirt to wear. M ondays I   
got my allowance from the wife -carfare and lunch money. I was always in debt to her and   
she was in debt to the grocer, the butcher, the landlord, and so on. I couldn't be bothered   
shaving - there wasn't time enough. I put on the torn shirt, gobble up the breakfast, and   
borrow a nickel for the subway. If she were in a bad mood I would swindle the money from   
the newsdealer at the subway. I got to the office out of breath, an hour behind time and a   
dozen calls to make before I even talk to an applicant. While I make one call there are   
three other calls waiting to be answered. I use two telephones at once. The switchboard is   
buzzing. Hymie is sharpening his pencils between calls. MacGovern the doorman is standing   
at my elbow to give me a word of advice about one of the applicants, probably a crook who   
is trying to sneak back under a false name. Behind me are the cards and ledgers containing   
the name of every applicant who had ever passed through the machine. The bad ones are   
starred in red ink; 
 
some    of    them    have    six    aliases    after    their    names.    Meanwhile    the    room    is    crawling    like    a   
hive. The room stinks with sweat, dirty feet, old uniforms, camphor, lysol, bad breaths.   
Half of them will have to be turned away - not that we don't need them, but that even under   
the worst conditions they just won't do. The man in front of my desk, standing at the rail   
with palsied hands and bleary eyes, is an ex-mayor of New York City. He's seventy now and   
would be glad to take anything. He has 
 
66 
 
wonderful letters of recommendation, but we can't take any one over forty-five years of   
 
 
 42 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
age. Forty-five in New York is the dead line. The telephone rings and it's a smooth   
secretary from the Y.M .C.A. Wouldn't I make an exception for a boy who has just walked into   
his office - a boy who was in the reformatory for a year or so.    What did he do? He tried to   
rape his sister. An Italian, of course. O'M ara, my assistant, is putting an applicant   
through the third degree. He suspects him of being an epileptic. Finally he succeeds and   
for good measure the boy throws a fit right there in the office. One of the women faints. A   
beautiful looking young woman with a handsome fur around her neck is trying to persuade me   
to take her on. She's a whore clean through and I know if I put her on there'll be hell to   
pay. She wants to work in a certain building uptown - because it is near home, she says.   
Nearing lunch time and a few cronies are beginning to drop in. They sit around watching me   
work, as if it were a vaudeville performance. Kronski, the medical student arrives; he says   
one of the boys I've just hired has Parkinson's disease. I've been so busy I haven't had a   
chance to go to the toilet. All the telegraph operators, all the managers, suffer from   
haemorrhoids, so O'Rourke tells me. He's been having electrical massages for the last two   
years, but nothing works. Lunch time and there are six of us at the table. Some one will   
have    to pay    for me,    as usual.    We gulp    it down    and rush    back. M ore    calls to    make, more   
applicants to interview. The vice-president is raising hell because we can't keep the force   
up to normal. Every paper in New York and for twenty miles outside New York carries long   
ads demanding help. All the schools have been canvassed for part time messengers. All the   
charity bureaux and relief societies have been invoked. They drop out like flies. Some of   
them don't even last an hour. It's a human flour mill. And the saddest thing about it is   
that it's totally unnecessary. But that's not my concern. Mine is to do or die, as Kipling   
says. I plug on, through one victim after another, the telephone ringing like mad, the   
place smelling more and more vile, the holes getting bigger and bigger. Each one is a human   
being asking for a crust of bread; I have his height, weight, colour, religion, education,   
experience, etc. 
 
67 
 
All the data will go into a ledger to be filed alphabetically and then chronologically.   
Names and dates. Fingerprints too, if we had the time for it. So that what? So that the   
American people may enjoy the fastest form of communication known to man, so that they may   
sell their wares more quickly, so that the moment you drop dead in the street your next of   
kin may be appraised immediately, that is to say within an hour, unless the messenger to   
whom the telegram is entrusted decides to throw up the job and throw the whole batch of   
telegrams in the garbage can. Twenty million Christmas blanks, all wishing you a Merry   
Christmas and a Happy New Year, from the directors and president and vice-president of the   
Cosmodemonic Telegraph Company, and maybe the telegram reads "Mother dying, come at once",   
but the clerk is too busy to notice the message and if you sue for damages, spiritual   
damages, there is a legal department trained expressly to meet such emergencies and so you   
can be sure that your mother will die and you will have a Merry Christmas and Happy New   
Year just the same. The clerk, of course, will be fired and after a month or so he will   
come back for a messenger's job and he will be taken on and put on the night shift near the   
docks where nobody will recognize him, and his wife will come with the brats to thank the   
 43 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
general manager, or perhaps the vice-president himself, for the kindness and consideration   
shown. And then one day everybody will be heartily surprised that said messenger robbed the   
till and O'Rourke will be asked to take the night train for Cleveland or Detroit and to   
track him down if it cost ten thousand dollars. And then the vice-president will issue an   
order that no more Jews are to be hired, but after three or four days he will let up a bit   
because there are nothing but Jews coming for the job. And because it's getting so very   
tough and the timber so damned scarce I'm on the point of hiring a midget from the circus   
and I probably would have hired him if he hadn't broken down and confessed that he was a   
she. And to make it worse Valeska takes "it" under her wing, takes "it" home that night and   
under pretense of sympathy gives "it" a thorough examination, including a vaginal   
exploration with the index finger of the right hand. And the 
 
70 
 
nostrils. I longed to be free of it all and yet I was irresistibly attracted. I was violent   
and phlegmatic at the same time. I was like the lighthouse itself - secure in the midst of   
the most turbulent sea. Beneath me was solid rock, the same shelf of rock on which the   
towering skyscrapers were reared. M y foundations went deep into the earth and the armature   
of my body was made of steel riveted with hot bolts. Above all I was an eye, a huge   
searchlight which scoured far and wide, which revolved ceaselessly, pitilessly. This eye so   
wide awake seemed to have made all my other faculties dormant; all my powers were used up   
in the effort to see, to take in the drama of the world. 
 
If I longed for destruction it was merely that this eye might be extinguished. I longed for   
an earthquake, for some cataclysm of nature which would plunge the lighthouse into the sea.   
I wanted a metamorphosis, a change to fish, to leviathan, to destroyer. I wanted the earth   
to open up, to swallow everything in one engulfing yawn. I wanted to see the city buried   
fathoms deep in the bosom of the sea. I wanted to sit in a cave and read by candlelight. (I   
wanted that eye extinguished so that I might have a change to know my own body, my own   
desires. I wanted to be alone for a thousand years in order to reflect on what I had seen   
and heard - and in order to forget. I wanted something of the earth which was not of man's   
doing, something absolutely divorced from the human of which I was surfeited. I wanted   
something purely terrestrial and absolutely divested of idea. I wanted to feel the blood   
running back into my veins, even at the cost of annihilation. I wanted to shake the stone   
and the light out of my system. I wanted the dark fecundity of nature, the deep well of the   
womb, silence, or else the lapping of the black waters of death. I wanted to be that night   
which the remorseless eye illuminated, a night diapered with stars and trailing comets. To   
be of night, so frighteningly silent, so utterly incomprehensible and eloquent at the same   
time. Never more to speak or to listen or to think. To be englobed and encompassed and to   
encompass and to englobe at the same time. No more pity, no more tenderness. To be human   
only terrestrially, like a plant or a worm or a 
 
71 
 
 
 
 44 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
brook. To be decomposed, divested of light and stone, variable as the molecule, durable as   
the atom, heartless as the earth itself. 
 
It was just about a week before Valeska committed suicide that I ran into Mara. The week or   
two preceding that event was a veritable nightmare. A series of sudden deaths and strange   
encounters with women. First of all there was Pauline Janowski, a little Jewess of sixteen   
or seventeen who was without a home and without friends or relatives. She came to the   
office looking for a job. It was towards dosing time and I didn't have the heart to turn   
her down cold. For some reason or other I took it into my head to bring her home for dinner   
and if possible try to persuade the wife to put her up for a while. What attracted me to   
her was her passion for Balzac. All the way home she was talking to me about    Lost   
Illusions. The car was packed and we were jammed so tight together that it didn't make any   
difference what we were talking about because we were both thinking of only one thing. My   
wife of course was stupefied to see me standing at the door with a beautiful young girl.   
She was polite and courteous in her frigid way but I could see immediately that it was no   
use asking her to put the girl up. It was about all she could do to sit through the dinner   
with us. As soon as we had finished she excused herself and went to the movies. The girl   
started to weep. We were still sitting at the table, the dishes piled up in front of us. I   
went over to her and I put my arms around her. I felt genuinely sorry for her and I was   
perplexed as to what to do for her. Suddenly she threw her arms around my neck and she   
kissed me passionately. We stood there for a long while embracing each other and then I   
thought to myself no, it's a crime, and besides maybe the wife didn't go to the movies at   
all, maybe she'll be ducking back any minute. I told the kid to pull herself together, that   
we'd take a trolley ride somewhere. I saw the child's bank lying on the mantelpiece and I   
took it to the toilet and emptied it silently. There was only about seventy -five cents in   
it. We got on a trolley and went to the beach. Finally we found a deserted spot and we lay   
down in the sand. She 
 
72 
 
was hysterically passionate and there was nothing to do but to do it. I thought she would   
reproach me afterwards, but she didn't. We lay there a while and she began talking about   
Balzac again. It seems she had ambitions to be a writer herself. I asked her what she was   
going to do. She said she hadn't the least idea. When we got up to go she asked me to put   
her on the highway. Said she thought she would go to Cleveland or some place. It was after   
midnight when I left her standing in front of a gasoline station. She had about thirty -five   
cents in her pocket-book. As I started homeward I began cursing my wife for the mean son of   
a bitch that she was. I wished to Christ it was she whom I had left standing on the highway   
with no place to go to. I knew that when I got back she wouldn't even mention the girl's   
name. 
 
I got back and she was waiting up for me. I thought she was going to give me hell again.   
But no, she had waited up because there was an important message from O'Rourke. I was to   
telephone him soon as I got home. However, I decided not to telephone. I decided to get   
 45 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
undressed and go to bed. Just when I had gotten comfortably settled the telephone rang. It   
was O'Rourke. There was a telegram for me at the office - he wanted to know if he should   
open it and read it to me. I said of course. Thetelegram was signed M onica. It was from   
Buffalo. Said she was arriving at the Grand Central in the morning with her mother's body.   
I thanked him and went back to bed. No questions from the wife. I lay there wondering what   
to do. If I were to comply with the request that would mean starting things all over again.   
I had just been thanking my stars that I had gotten rid of Monica. And now she was coming   
back with her mother's corpse. Tears and reconciliation. No, I didn't like the prospect at   
all. Supposing I didn't show up ? What then ? There was always somebody around to take care   
of a corpse. Especially if the bereaved were an attractive young blonde with sparkling blue   
eyes. I wondered if she'd go back to her job in the restaurant. If she hadn't known Greek   
and Latin I would never have been mixed up with her. But my curiosity got the better of me.   
And then she was so god-damn poor, that too got me. M aybe it wouldn't have been so bad if   
her hands hadn't smelled 
 
73 
 
greasy. That was the fly in the ointment - the greasy hands. I remember the first night I   
met her and we strolled through the park. She was ravishing to look at, and she was alert   
and intelligent. It was just the time when women were wearing short skirts and she wore   
them to advantage. I used to go to the restaurant night after night just to watch her   
moving around, watch her bending over to serve or stooping down to pick up a fork. And with   
the beautiful legs and the bewitching eyes a marvellous line about Homer, with the pork and   
sauerkraut a verse of Sapho's, the Latin conjugations, the Odes of Pindar, with the dessert   
perhaps the    Rubaiyat or Cynara.    But the greasy hands and the frowsy  bed in the boarding   
house opposite the market place - Whew! I couldn't stomach it. The more I shunned her the   
more clinging she became. Ten page letters about love with footnotes on    Thus Spake   
Zarathustra.    And then suddenly silence and me congratulating myself heartily. No, I   
couldn't bring myself to go to the Grand Central Station in the morning. I rolled over and   
I fell sound asleep. In the morning I would get the wife to telephone the office and say I   
was ill. I hadn't been ill now for over a week ~ it was coming to me. 
 
At noon I find Kronski waiting for me outside the office. He wants me to have lunch with   
him ... there's an Egyptian girl he wants me to meet. The girl turns out to be a Jewess,   
but she came from Egypt and she looks like an Egyptian. She's hot stuff and the two of us   
are working on her at once. As I was supposed to be ill I decided not to return to the   
office but to take a stroll through the East Side. Kronski was going back to cover me up.   
We shook hands with the girl and we each went our separate ways. I headed towards the river   
where it was cool, having forgotten about the girl almost immediately. I sat on the edge of   
a pier with my legs dangling over the stringpiece. A scow passed with a load of red bricks.   
Suddenly Monica came to my mind. Monica arriving at the Grand Central Station with a   
corpse. A corpse f.o.b. New York! It seemed so incongruous and ridiculous that I burst out   
laughing. What had she done with it? Had she checked it or had she left it on a siding? No   
doubt she was cursing me out roundly. I wondered what 
 46 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
she would really think if she could have imagined me sitting there at the dock with my legs   
dangling over the stringpiece. It was warm and sultry despite the breeze that was blowing   
off the river. I began to snooze. As I dozed off Pauline came to my mind. I imagined her   
walking along the highway with her hand up. She was a brave kid, no doubt about it. Funny   
that    she    didn't    seem    to    worry    about    getting    knocked    up.    Maybe    she    was    so    desperate    she   
didn't care. And Balzac! That too was highly incongruous. Why Balzac? Well, that was her   
affair. Anyway she'd have enough to eat with, until she met another guy. But a kid like   
that thinking about becoming a writer! Well, why not? Everybody had illusions of one sort   
or another. Monica too wanted to be a writer. Everybody was becoming a writer. A writer!   
Jesus, how futile it seemed! 
 
I dozed off... When I woke up I had an erection. The sun seemed to be burning right into my   
fly. I got up and I washed my face at a drinking fountain. It was still as hot and sultry   
as ever. The asphalt was soft as mush, the flies were biting, the garbage was rotting in   
the gutter. I walked about between the pushcarts and looked at things with an empty eye. I   
had a sort of lingering hard-on all the while, but no definite object in mind. It was only   
when I got back to Second Avenue that I suddenly remembered the Egyptian Jewess from lunch   
time. I remembered her saying that she lived over the Russian Restaurant near Twelfth   
Street. Still I hadn't any definite idea of what I was going to do. Just browsing about,   
killing time. My feet nevertheless were dragging me northward, towards Fourteenth Street.   
When I got abreast of the Russian restaurant I paused a moment and then I ran up the stairs   
three at a time. The hall door was open. I climbed up a couple of flights scanning the   
names    on the    doors. She    was on    the top    floor and    there was    a man's    name under    hers. I   
knocked softly. No answer. I knocked again, a little harder. This time I heard some one   
moving about. Then a voice dose to the door asking who is it and at the same time the knob   
turning. I pushed the door open and stumbled into the darkened room. Stumbled right into   
her arms and felt her naked under the half-opened kimono. She must have come 
 
75 
 
out of a sound sleep and only half realized who was holding her in his arms. When she   
realized it was me she tried to break away but I had her tight and I began kissing her   
passionately and at the same time backing her up towards the couch near the window. She   
mumbled something about the door being open but I wasn't taking any chance on letting her   
slip out of my arms. So I made a slight detour and little by little I edged her towards the   
door and made her shove it with her ass. I locked it with my one free hand and then I moved   
her    into the    centre of    the room    and with    the free    hand I    unbuttoned my    fly and    got my   
pecker out and into position. She was so drugged with sleep that it was almost like working   
on an automation. I could see too that she was enjoying the idea of being fucked half   
asleep. The only thing was that every time I made a lunge she grew more wide awake. And as   
she grew more conscious she became more frightened. It was difficult to know how to put her   
to sleep again without losing a good fuck. I managed to tumble her on to the couch without   
 47 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
losing ground and she was hot as hell now, twisting and squirming like an eel. From the   
time I had started to maul her I don't think she had opened her eyes once. I kept saying to   
myself- "an Egyptian fuck ... an Egyptian fuck" - and so as not to shoot off immediately I   
deliberately began thinking about the corpse that Monica had dragged to the Grand Central   
Station and about the thirty-five cents that I had left with Pauline on the highway. Then   
bango! a loud knock on the door and with that she opens her eyes and looks at me in utmost   
terror. I started to pull away quickly but to my surprise she held me tight. "Don't move",   
she whispered in my ear. "Wait!" There was another loud knock and then I heard Kronski's   
voice saying "It's me, Thelma ... it's me    Izzy."    At that I almost burst out laughing. We   
slumped back again into a natural position and as her eyes softly closed I moved it around   
inside her, gently so as not to wake her up again. It was one of the most wonderful fucks I   
ever had in my life. I thought it was going to last forever. Whenever I felt in danger of   
going off I would stop moving and think - think for example of where I would like to spend   
my vacation, if I got one, or think of the 
 
76 
 
shirts lying in the bureau drawer, or the patch in the bedroom carpet just at the foot of   
the bed. Kronski was still standing at the door -1 could hear him changing about from one   
position to another. Every time I became aware of him standing there I jibbed her a little   
for good measure and in her half sleep she answered back, humorously, as though she   
understood what I meant by this put-and-take language. I didn't dare to think what she   
might be thinking or I'd have come immediately. Sometimes I skirted dangerously close to   
it, but the saving trick was always M onica and the corpse at the Grand Central Station. The   
thought of that, the humorousness of it, I mean, acted like a cold douche. 
 
When it was all over she opened her eyes wide and stared at me, as though she were taking   
me in for the first time. I hadn't a word to say to her; the only thought in my head was to   
get out as quickly as possible. As we were washing up I noticed a note on the floor near   
the door. It was from Kronski. His wife had just been taken to the hospital - he wanted her   
to meet him at the hospital. I felt relieved! it meant that I could break away without   
wasting any words. 
 
The next day I had a telephone call from Kronski. His wife had died on the operating table.   
That evening I went home for dinner; we were still at the table when the bell rang. There   
was Kronski standing at the gate looking absolutely sunk. It was always difficult for me to   
oner words of condolence; 
 
with him it was absolutely impossible. I listened to my wife uttering her trite words of   
sympathy and I felt more than ever disgusted with her. "Let's get out of here," I said. 
 
We walked along in absolute silence for a while. At the park we turned in and headed for   
the meadows. There was a heavy mist which made it impossible to see a yard ahead. Suddenly,   
as we were swimming along, he began to sob. I stopped and turned my head away. When I   
 48 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought he had finished I looked around and there he was staring at me with a strange   
smile. "It's funny", he said, "how hard it is to accept death." I smiled too now and put my   
hand on his shoulder. "Go on," I said, "talk your head off. Get it off your chest." We   
started walking again, up and down over the meadows, as though we 
 
77 
 
were walking under the sea. The mist had become so thick that I could barely discern his   
features. He was talking quietly and madly. "I knew it would happen," he said. "It was too   
beautiful to last." The night before she was taken ill he had had a dream. He dreamt that   
he had lost his identity. "I was stumbling around in the dark calling my own name. I   
remember coming to a bridge, and looking down into the water I saw myself drowning. I   
jumped off the bridge head first and when I came up I saw Yetta floating under the bridge.   
She was dead." And then suddenly he added: "You were there yesterday when I knocked at the   
door, weren't you? I knew you were there and I couldn't go away. I knew too that Yetta was   
dying and I wanted to be with her, but I was afraid to go alone." I said nothing and he   
rambled on. "The first girl I ever loved died in the same way. I was only a kid and I   
couldn't get over it. Every night I used to go to the cemetery and sit by her grave. People   
thought I was out of my mind. I guess I was out of my mind. Yesterday; when I was standing   
at the door, it all came back to me. I was back in Trenton, at the grave, and the sister of   
the girl I loved was sitting beside me. She said it couldn't go on that way much longer,   
that I would go mad. I thought to myself that I really was mad and to prove it to myself I   
decided to do something mad and so I said to her it isn't    her    I love,    It's you,    and I   
pulled her over me and we lay there kissing each other and finally I screwed her, right   
beside the grave. And I think that cured me because I never went back there again and I   
never thought about her any more -until yesterday when I was standing at the door. If I   
could have gotten hold of you yesterday I would have strangled you. I don't know why I felt   
that way but it seemed to me that you had opened up a tomb, that you were violating the   
dead body of the girl I loved. That's crazy isn't it? And why did I come to see you to- 
night? Maybe it's because you're absolutely indifferent to me ... because you're not a Jew   
and I can talk to you... because you don't give a damn, and you're right... Did you ever   
read  The Revolt of the Angels?"  
 
We had just arrived at the bicycle path which encircles the park. The lights of the   
boulevard were swimming in the 
 
78 
 
mist. I took a good look at him and I saw that he was out of his head. I wondered if I   
could make him laugh. I was afraid, too, that if he once got started laughing he would   
never stop. So I began to talk at random, about Anatole France at first, and then about   
other writers, and finally, when I felt that I was losing him, I suddenly switched to   
General Ivolgin, and with that he began to laugh, not a laugh either, but a cackle, a   
hideous cackle, like a rooster with its head on the block. It got him so badly that he had   
 49 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to stop and hold his guts; the tears were streaming down his eyes and between the cackles   
he let out the most terrible, heart-rending sobs. "I knew you would do me good," he blurted   
out, as the last outbreak died away. "I always said you were a crazy son of a bitch...   
You're a Jew bastard yourself, only you don't know it... Now tell me, you bastard, how was   
it yesterday? Did you get your end in? Didn't I tell you she was a good lay? And do you   
know who she's living with, Jesus, you were lucky you didn't get caught. She's living with   
a Russian poet - you know the guy, too. I introduced you to him once at the Cafe Royal.   
Better not let him get wind of it. He'll beat your brains out... and he'll write a   
beautiful poem about it and send it to her with a bunch of roses. Sure I knew him out in   
Stelton, in the anarchist colony. His old man was a Nihilist. The whole family's crazy. By   
the way, you'd better take care of yourself. I meant to tell you that the other day, but I   
didn't think you would act so quickly. You know she may have syphilis. I'm not trying to   
scare you. I'm just telling you for your own good. . . ." 
 
This outburst seemed to really assuage him. He was trying to tell me in his twisted Jewish   
way that he liked me. To do so he had to first destroy everything around me - the wife, the   
job, my friends, the "nigger wench", as he called Valeska, and so on. "I think some day   
you're going to be a great writer," he said. "But," he added maliciously, "first you'll   
have to suffer a bit. I mean really suffer, because you don't know what the word means yet.   
You only think you've suffered. You've got to fall in love first. That nigger wench now...   
you don't really suppose that you're in love with her, do you? Did you ever take a good   
look at her ass ... how it's spreading, I mean? In 
 
79 
 
five years she'll look like Aunt Jemima. You'll make a swell couple walking down the avenue   
with a string of pickaninnies trailing behind you. Jesus, I'd rather see y ou marry a Jewish   
girl. You wouldn't appreciate her, of course, but she'd be good for you. You need something   
to steady yourself. You're scattering your energies. Listen, why do you run around with all   
these dumb bastards you pick up? You seem to have a genius for picking up the wrong people.   
Why    don't    you    throw    yourself    into    something    useful?    You    don't    belong    in    that    job    -    you   
could be a big guy somewhere. Maybe a labour leader ... I don't know what exactly. But   
first you've got to get rid of that hatchet-faced wife of yours. Ugh! when I look at her I   
could spit in her face. I don't see how a guy like you could ever have married a bitch like   
that. What was it - just a pair of streaming ovaries? Listen, that's what's the matter with   
you -you've got nothing but sex on the brain... No, I don't mean that either. You've got a   
mind and you've got passion and enthusiasm ... but you don't seem to give a damn what you   
do or what happens to you. If you weren't such a romantic bastard I'd almost swear that you   
were a Jew. It's different with me -1 never had anything to look forward to. But you've got   
something in you - only you're too damned lazy to bring it out. Listen, when I hear you   
talk sometimes I think to myself - if only that guy would put it down on paper! Why you   
could write a book that would make a guy like Dreiser hang his head. You're different from   
the Americans I know; somehow you don't belong, and it's a damned good thing you don't.   
You're a little cracked, too - I suppose you know that. But in a good way. Listen a little   
 50 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while ago, if it had been anybody else who talked to me that way I'd have murdered him. I   
think I like you better because you didn't try to give me any sympathy. I know better than   
to expect sympathy from you. If you had said one false word to-night I'd have really gone   
mad. I know it. I was on the very edge. When you started in about General Ivolgin I thought   
for a minute it was all up with me. That's what makes me think you've got something in   
you ... that was real cunning! And now let me tell    you    something ... if you don't pull   
yourself together soon you're going to be 
 
80 
 
screwy. You've got something inside you that's eating you up. I don't know what it is, but   
you can't put it over on me. I know you from the bottom up. I know there's something   
griping you - and it's not just your wife, nor your job, nor even that nigger wench whom   
you think you're in love with. Sometimes I think you were born in the wrong time. Listen, I   
don't want you to think I'm making an idol of you but there's something to what I say... if   
you had just a little more confidence in yourself you could be the biggest man in the world   
to-day. You wouldn't even have to be a writer. You might become another Jesus Christ for   
all I know. Don't laugh -1 mean it. You haven't the slightest idea of your own   
possibilities ... you're absolutely blind to everything except your own desires. You don't   
know what you want. You don't know because you never stop to think. You're letting people   
use you up. You're a damned fool, an idiot. If I had a tenth of what you've got I could   
turn the world upside down. You think that's crazy, eh? Well, listen to me... I was never   
more sane in my life. When I came to see you to-night I thought I was about ready to commit   
suicide. It doesn't make much difference whether I do it or not. But anyway, I don't see   
much point in doing it now. That won't bring her back to me. I was born unlucky. Wherever I   
go I seem to bring disaster. But I don't want to sick off yet... I want to do some good in   
the world first. That may sound silly to you, but it's true. I'd like to do something for   
others ..." 
 
He stopped abruptly and looked at me again with that strange wan smile. It was the look of   
a hopeless Jew in whom, as with all his race, the life instinct was so strong that, even   
though there was absolutely nothing to hope for, he was powerless to kill himself. That   
hopelessness was something quite alien to me. I thought to myself - if only we could change   
skins! Why, I could kill myself for a bagatelle! And what got me more than anything was the   
thought that he wouldn't even enjoy the funeral - his own wife's funeral! God knows, the   
funerals we had were sorry enough affairs, but there was always a bit of food and drink   
afterwards, and some good obscene jokes and some hearty belly laughs. M aybe I was too young   
to appreciate 
 
81 
 
die sorrowful aspects, though I saw plainly enough how they howled and wept. But that never   
meant much to me because after the funeral sitting in the beer garden next to the cemetery,   
there was always an atmosphere of good cheer despite the black garments and the crepes and   
 51 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the wreaths. It seemed to me, as a kid then, that they were really trying to establish some   
sort of communion with the dead person. Something almost Egyptian-like, when I think back   
on it. Once upon a time I thought they were just a bunch of hypocrites. But they weren't.   
They were just stupid, healthy Germans with a lust for life. Death was something outside   
their ken, strange to say, because if you went only by what they said you would imagine   
that it occupied a good deal of their thoughts. But they really didn't grasp it at all -   
not the way the Jew does, for example. They talked about the life hereafter but they never   
really believed in it. And if any one were so bereaved as to pine away they looked upon   
that person suspiciously, as you would look upon an insane person. There were limits to   
sorrow as there were limits to joy, that was the impression they gave me. And at the   
extreme limits there was always the stomach which had to be filled - with limburger   
sandwiches and beer and Kummel and turkey legs if there were any about. They wept in their   
beer, like Children. And the next minute they were laughing, laughing over some curious   
quirk in the dead person's character. Even the way they used the past tense had a curious   
effect upon me. An hour after he was shovelled under they were saying of the defunct - "he   
was always so good-natured" - as though the person in mind were dead a thousand years, a   
character    of    history,    or    a    personage    out    of    Nibelungen    Lied.    The    thing    was    that    he    was   
dead, definitely dead for all time, and they, the living, were cut off from him now and   
forever, and to-day as well as to-morrow must be lived through, the clothes washed, the   
dinner prepared, and when the next one was struck down there would be a coffin to select   
and a squabble about the will, but it would be all in the daily routine and to take time   
off to grieve and sorrow was sinful because God, if there was a God, had ordained it that   
way and we on earth had nothing to say about it. To go beyond the ordained 
 
82 
 
limits of joy or grief was wicked. To threaten madness was the high sin. They had a   
terrific animal sense of adjustment, marvellous to behold if it had been truly animal,   
horrible to witness when you realized that it was nothing more than dull German torpor,   
insensirivity. And yet, somehow, I preferred these animated stomachs to the hydra-headed   
sorrow of the Jew. At bottom I couldn't feel sorry for Kronski - I would have to feel sorry   
for his whole tribe. The death of his wife was only an item, a trifle, in the history of   
his calamities. As he himself had said, he was born unlucky. He was born to see things go   
wrong - because for five thousand years things had been going wrong in the blood of the   
race.    They    came    into    the    world    with    that    sunken,    hopeless    leer    on    their    faces    and    they   
would go out of the world the same way. They left a bad smell behind them - a poison, a   
vomit of sorrow. The stink they were trying to take out of the world was the stink they   
themselves had brought into the world. I reflected on all this as I listened to him. I felt   
so well and dean inside that when we parted, after I had turned down a side street, I began   
to whistle and hum. And then a terrible thirst came upon me and I says to meself in me best   
Irish brogue - shure and it's a bit of a drink ye should be having now, me lad - and saying   
it I stumbled into a hole in the wall and I ordered a big foaming stein of beer and a thick   
hamburger sandwich with plenty of. onions. I had another mug of beer and then a drop of   
brandy and I thought to myself in my callous way - if the poor bastard hasn't got brains   
 52 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough to enjoy his own wife's funeral then I'll enjoy it for him. And the more I thought   
about it, the happier I grew, and if there was the least bit of grief or envy it was only   
for the fact that I couldn't change places with her, the poor dead Jewish soul, because   
death was something absolutely beyond the grip and comprehension of a bum guy like myself   
arid it was a pity to waste it on the likes of them as knew all about it and didn't need it   
anyway. I got so damned intoxicated with the idea of dying that in my drunken stupor I was   
mumbling to the God above to kill me this night, kill me. God, and let me know what it's   
all about. I tried my stinking best to imagine what it was like, giving 
 
83 
 
up the ghost, but it was no go. The best I could do was to imitate a death rattle, but on   
that I nearly choked, and then I got so damned frightened that I almost shit in my pants.   
That wasn't death, anyway. That was just choking. Death was more like what we went through   
in the park: two people walking side by side in the mist, rubbing against trees and bushes,   
and not a word between them. It was something emptier than the name itself and yet right   
and peaceful, dignified, if you like. It was not a continuation of life, but a leap in the   
dark and no possibility of ever coming back, not even as a grain of dust. And that was   
right and beautiful, I said to myself, because why would one want to come back. To taste it   
once is to taste it forever - life or death. Whichever way the coin flips is right, so long   
as you hold no stakes. Sure, it's tough to choke on your own spittle - it's disagreeable   
more than anything else. And besides, one doesn't always die choking to death. Sometimes   
one goes off in his sleep, peaceful and quiet as a lamb. The Lord comes and gathers you up   
into the fold, as they say. Anyway, you stop breathing. And why the hell should one want to   
go on breathing forever? Anything that would have to be done interminably would be torture.   
The poor human bastards that we are, we ought to be glad that somebody devised a way out.   
We don't quibble about going to sleep. A third of our lives we snore away like drunken   
rats. What about that? Is that tragic? Well then, say three-thirds of drunken rat-like   
sleep. Jesus, if we had any sense we'd be dancing with glee at the thought of it! We could   
all die in bed tomorrow, without pain, without suffering - if we had the sense to take   
advantage of our remedies. We don't want to die, that's the trouble with us. That's why God   
and the whole shooting match upstairs in our crazy dustbins. General Ivolgin! That got a   
cackle out of him . .. and a few dry sobs. I might as well have said limburger cheese. But   
General Ivolgin means something to him ... something crazy. Limburger cheese would be too   
sober, too banal. It's all limburger cheese, however, including General Ivolgin, the poor   
drunken sap. General Ivolgin was evolved out of Dostoievski's limburger cheese, his own   
private brand. That 
 
84 
 
means a certain flavour, a certain label. So people recognize it when they smell it, taste   
it. But what made this General Ivolgin limburger cheese? Why, whatever made limburger   
cheese, which is x and therefore unknowable. And so therefore? Therefore nothing... nothing   
at all. Full stop - or eke a leap in the dark and no coming back. 
 53 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As I was taking my pants off I suddenly remembered what the bastard had told me. I looked   
at my cock and it looked just as innocent as ever. "Don't tell me you've got the syph," I   
said, holding it in my hand and squeezing it a bit as though I might see a bit of pus   
squirting out. No, I didn't think there was much chance of having the syph. I wasn't born   
under that kind of star. The clap, yes, that was possible. Everybody had the dap sometime   
or other. But not syph! I knew he'd wish it on me if he could, just to make me realize what   
suffering was. But I couldn't be bothered obliging him. I was born a dumb and lucky guy. I   
yawned. It was all so much god-damned limburger cheese that syph or no syph, I thought to   
myself, if she's up to it I'll tear off another piece and call it a day. But evidently she   
wasn't up to it. She was for turning her ass on me. So I just lay there with a stiff prick   
up against her ass and I gave it to her by mental telepathy. And by Jesus, she must have   
gotten the message sound asleep though she was, because it wasn't any trouble going in by   
the    stable door    and besides    I didn't    have to    look at    her face    which was    one hell    of a   
relief. I thought to myself, as I gave her the last hook and whistle - "me lad it's   
limburger cheese and now you can turn over and snore ..." 
 
It seemed as if it would go on forever, the sex and death chant. The very next afternoon at   
the office I received a telephone call from my wife saying that her friend Arline had just   
been taken to the insane asylum. They were friends from the convent school in Canada where   
they had both studied music and the art of masturbation. I had met the whole flock of them   
little by little, including Sister Antolina who wore a truss and who apparently was the   
high priestess of the cult of Fonanism. They had all had a crush on Sister Antolina at one   
time or another. And Arline with the chocolate eclair 
 
85 
 
mug wasn't the first of the little group to go to the insane asylum. I don't say it was   
masturbation that drove them there but certainly the atmosphere of the convent had   
something to do with it. They were all spoiled in the egg. 
 
Before the afternoon was over my old friend M acGregor walked in. He arrived looking glum as   
usual and complaining about the advent of old age, though he was hardly past thirty. When I   
told him about Arline he seemed to liven up a bit. He said he always knew there was   
something wrong with her. Why? Because when he tried to force her one night she began to   
weep hysterically. It wasn't the weeping so much as what she said. She said she had sinned   
against the Holy Ghost and for that she would have to lead a life of continence. Recalling   
the incident he began to laugh in his mirthless way. "I said to her -well you don't need to   
do it if you don't want... just hold it in your hand. Jesus, when I said that I thought   
she'd go clean off her nut. She said I was trying to soil her innocence - that's the way   
she put it. And at the same time she took it in her hand and she squeezed it so hard I   
damned near fainted. Weeping all the while, too. And still harping on the Holy Ghost and   
her 'innocence'. I remembered what you told me once and so I gave her a sound slap in the   
jaw. It worked like magic. She quieted down after a bit, enough to let me slip it in, and   
then the real fun commenced. Listen, did you ever fuck a crazy woman? It's something to   
 54 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience. From the instant I got it in she started talking a blue streak. I can't   
describe it to you exactly, but it was almost as though she didn't know I was fucking her.   
Listen, I don't know whether you've ever had a woman eat an apple while you were doing   
it... well, you can imagine how that affects you. This one was a thousand times worse. It   
got on my nerves so that I began to think I was a little queer myself . . . And now here's   
something you'll hardly believe, but I'm telling you the truth. You know what she did when   
we got through? She put her arms around me and she thanked me ... Wait, that isn't all.   
Then she got out of bed and she knelt down and offered up a prayer for my soul. Jesus, I   
remember that so well. 'Please make M ac a better Christian,' she said. And me lying there   
with a limp cock 
 
86 HENRYMILLER 
 
listening to her. I didn't know whether I was dreaming or what. 'Please make Mac a better   
Christian!' Can you beat that? 
 
"What are you doing to-night?" he added cheerfully. 
 
"Nothing special," I said. 
 
"Then come along with me. I've got a gal I want you to meet...    Paula, I picked her up at   
the Roseland a few nights ago. She's not crazy - she's just a nymphomaniac. I want to see   
you dance with her. It'll be a treat... just to watch you. Listen, if you don't shoot off   
in your pants when she starts wiggling, well then I'm a son of a bitch. Come on, close the   
joint. What's the use of farting around in this place?"  
 
There was a lot of time to kill before going to the Roseland so we went to a little hole in   
the wall over near Seventh Avenue. Before the war it was a French joint; now it was a   
speak-easy run by a couple of wops. There was a tiny bar near the door and in the back a   
little room with a sawdust floor and a slot machine for music. The idea was that we were to   
have a couple of drinks and then eat. That was the idea. Knowing him as I did, however, I   
wasn't at all sure that we would be going to the Roseland together. If a woman should come   
along who pleased his fancy - and for that she didn't have to be either beautiful or sound   
of wind and limb - I knew he'd leave me in the lurch and beat it. The only thing that   
concerned me, when I was with him, was to make sure in advance that he had enough money to   
pay for the drinks we ordered. And, of course, never to let him out of my sight until the   
drinks were paid for. 
 
The first drink or two always plunged him into reminiscence. Reminiscences of cunt to be   
sure. His reminiscences were reminiscent of a story he had told me once and which made an   
indelible    impression    upon    me.    It    was    about    a    Scotchman    on    his    de athbed.    Just    as    he    was   
about to pass away his wife, seeing him struggling to say something bends over him tenderly   
and says - "What is it. Jock, what is it ye're trying to say?" And Jock, with a last   
effort, raises himself wearily and says: 
 
 
 55 
 216 
 
   
 
-futility. The leitmotif was disease, because between fucks, as it were, he worried  
 
 
 
 
"Just cunt... cunt... cunt." 
 
That was always the opening theme, and the ending theme, with MacGregor. It was his way of   
saying 
 
87 
 
his head off, or rather he worried the head off his cock. It was the most natural thing in   
the world, at the end of an evening, for him to say - "come on upstairs a minute, I want to   
show you my cock." From taking it out and looking at it and washing it and scrubbing it a   
dozen times a day naturally his cock was always swollen and inflamed. Every now and then he   
went to the doctor and he had it sounded. Or, just to relieve him, the doctor would give   
him a little box of salve and tell him not to drink so much. This would cause no end of   
debate, because as he would say to me, "if the salve is any good why do I have to stop   
drinking?" Or, "if I stopped drinking altogether do you think I would need to use the   
salve?" Of course, whatever I recommended went in one ear and out the other. He had to   
worry about something and the penis was certainly good food for worry. Sometimes he worried   
about his scalp. He had dandruff, as most everybody has, and when his cock was in good   
condition he forgot about that and he worried about his scalp. Or else his chest. The   
moment he thought about his chest he would start to cough. And such coughing! As though he   
were in the last stages of consumption. And when he was running after a woman he was as   
nervous and irritable as a cat. He couldn't get her quickly enough. The moment he had her   
he was worrying about how to get rid of her. They all had something wrong with them, some   
trivial little thing, usually, which took the edge off his appetite. 
 
He    was rehearsing    all this    as we    sat in    the gloom    of the    back room.    After a    couple of   
drinks he got up, as usual, to go to the toilet, and on his way he dropped a coin in the   
slot machine and the jiggers began to jiggle and with that he perked up and pointing to the   
glasses he said: "Order another round!" He came back from the toilet looking   
extraordinarily complacent, whether because he had relieved his bladder or because he had   
run into a girl in the hallway, I don't know. Anyhow, as he sat down, he started in on   
another tack - very composed now and very serene, almost like a philosopher. "You know,   
Henry, we're getting on in years. You and I oughtn't to be frittering our time away like   
this. If we're ever going to amount to anything it's high time we started in..." I had been   
hearing 
 
88 
 
this line for years now and I knew what the upshot would be. This was just a little   
parenthesis while he calmly glanced about the room and decided which bimbo was the least   
sottish-looking. While he discoursed about the miserable failure of our lives his feet were   
dancing and his eyes were getting brighter and brighter. It would happen as it always   
happened, that just as he was saying - "Now you take Woodruff, for instance. He'll never   
get ahead because he's just a natural mean scrounging son of a bitch..." - just at such a   
 56 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moment, as I say it would happen that some drunken cow in passing the table would catch his   
eye and without the slightest pause he would interrupt his narrative to say "hello kid, why   
don't you sit down and have a drink with us?" And as a drunken bitch like that never   
travels alone, but always in pairs, why she'd respond with a "Certainly, can I bring my   
friend over?" And MacGregor, as though he were the most gallant chap in the world, would   
say "Why sure, why not? What's her name?" And then, tugging at my sleeve, he'd bend over   
and whisper: 
 
"Don't you beat it on me, do you hear? We'll give 'em one drink and get rid of them, see?"  
 
And, as it always happened, one drink led to another and the bill was getting too high and   
he couldn't see why he should waste his money on a couple of bums so you go out first,   
Henry, and pretend you're buying some medicine and I'll follow in a few minutes ... but   
wait for me, you son of a bitch, don't leave me in the lurch like you did the last time.   
And like I always did, when I got outside I walked away as fast as my legs would carry me,   
laughing to myself and thanking my lucky stars that I had gotten away from him as easily as   
I had. With all those drinks under my belt it didn't matter much where my feet were   
dragging me. Broadway lit up just as crazy as ever and the crowd thick as molasses. Just   
fling yourself into it like an ant and let yourself get pushed along. Everybody doing it,   
some for a good reason and some for no reason at all. All this push and movement   
representing action, success, get ahead. Stop and look at shoes or fancy shirts, the new   
fall overcoat, wedding rings at 98 cents a piece. Every other joint a food emporium. 
 
Every time I hit that runway towards dinner hour a fever of 
 
89 
 
expectancy seized me. It's only a stretch of a few blocks from Times Square to Fiftieth   
Street, and when one says Broadway that's all that's really meant and it's really nothing,   
just a chicken run and a lousy one at that, but at seven in the evening when everybody's   
rushing for a table there's a sort of electric crackle in the air and your hair stands on   
end like an antennae and if you're receptive you not only get every bash and flicker but   
you get the statistical itch, the    quid pro quo    of the interactive, interstitial,   
ectoplasmatic quantum of bodies jostling in space like the stars which compose the Milky   
Way, only this is the Gay White Way, the top of the world with no roof and not even a crack   
or a hole under your feet to fall through and say it's a lie. The absolute impersonality of   
it brings you to a pitch of warm human delirium which makes you run forward like a blind   
nag and wag your delirious ears. Every one is so utterly, confoundedly not himself that you   
become automatically the personification of the whole human race, shaking hands with a   
thousand human hands, cackling with a thousand different human tongues, cursing,   
applauding, whistling, crooning, soliloquizing, orating, gesticulating, urinating,   
fecundating, wheedling, cajoling, whimpering, bartering, pimping, caterwauling, and so on   
and so forth. You are all the men who ever lived up to M oses, and beyond that you are a   
woman buying a hat, or a bird cage, or just a mouse trap. You can lie in wait in a show- 
 57 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
window, like a fourteen carat gold ring, or you can climb the side of a building like a   
human fly, but nothing will stop the procession, not even umbrellas flying at lightning   
speed, nor double-decked walruses marching calmly to the oyster banks. Broadway, such as I   
see it now and have seen it for twenty-five years, is a ramp that was conceived by St.   
Thomas Aquinas while he was yet in the womb. It was meant originally to be used only by   
snakes and lizards, by the homed toad and the red heron, but when the great Spanish Armada   
was sunk the human kind wriggled out of the ketch and slopped over, creating by a sort of   
foul, ignominious squirm and wiggle the cunt-like cleft that runs from the Battery south to   
the golf links north through the dead and wormy centre of Manhattan Island. From Times   
Square to Fiftieth Street all that St. Thomas 
 
90 
 
Aquinas forgot to include in his magnum opus is here included, which is to say among other   
things, hamburger sandwiches, collar buttons, poodle dogs, slot machines, grey bowlers,   
typewriter ribbons, oranges sticks, free toilets, sanitary napkins, mint jujubes, billiard   
balls,    chopped    onions,    crinkled    doylies,    manholes,    chewing    gum,    sidecars    and    sour-balls,   
cellophane, cord tyres, magnetos, horse liniment, cough drops, feenamint, and that feline   
opacity of the hysterically endowed eunuch who marches to the soda fountain with a sawed   
off shotgun between his legs. The before-dinner atmosphere, the blend of patchouli, warm   
pitchblende, iced electricity, sugared sweat and powdered urine drives one on to a fever of   
delirious expectancy. Christ will never more come down to earth nor will there be any law- 
giver, nor will murder cease nor theft, nor rape, and yet... and yet one expects something,   
something terrifyingly marvellous and absurd, perhaps a cold lobster with mayonnaise served   
gratis, perhaps an invention, like the electric light, like television, only more   
devastating, more soul rending, an invention unthinkable that will bring a shattering calm   
and void, not the calm and void of death but of life such as the monks dreamed, such as is   
dreamed still in the Himalayas, in Tibet, in Lahore, in the Aleutian Islands, in Polynesia,   
in Easter Island, the dream of men before the flood, before the word was written, the dream   
of cave men and anthropophagists, of those with double sex and short tails, of those who   
are said to be crazy and have no way of defending themselves because they are outnumbered   
by those who are not crazy. Cold energy trapped by cunning brutes and then set free like   
explosive rockets, wheels, intricately interwheeled to give the illusion of force and speed   
some for light, some for power, some for motion, words wired by maniacs and mounted like   
fake teeth, perfect, and repulsive as lepers, ingratiating, soft, slippery, nonsensical   
movement,    vertical,    horizontal,    circular,    between    walls    and    through    walls,    for    pleasure,   
for barter, for crime; for sex; 
 
all light, movement, power impersonally conceived, generated, and distributed throughout a   
choked, cunt-like deft intended to dazzle and awe the savage, the yokel, the alien, but   
nobody dazzled or awed, this one hungry, that one lecherous, all one and 
 
91 
 
 
 
 58 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the same and no different from the savage, the yokel, the alien, except for odds and ends,   
bric-a-brac, the soapsuds of thought, the sawdust of the mind. In the same cunty deft,   
trapped and undazzled, millions have walked before me, among them one, Blaise Cendrars, who   
afterwards flew to the moon, thence back to earth and up the Orinoco impersonating a wild   
man but actually sound as a button, though no longer vulnerable, no longer mortal, a   
splendiferous hulk of a poem dedicated to the archipelago of insomnia. Of those with fever   
few hatched, among them myself still unhatched, but pervious and maculate, knowing with   
quiet ferocity the ennui of ceaseless drift and movement. Before dinner the slat and chink   
of sky light softly percolating through the boned grey dome, the vagrant hemispheres spored   
with blue-egged nuclei coagulating, ramifying, in the one basket lobsters, in the other the   
germination of a world antiseptically personal and absolute. Out of the manholes, grey with   
the underground life, men of the future world saturated with shit, the iced electricity   
biting into them like rats, the day done in and darkness coming on like the cool,   
refreshing shadows of the sewers. Like a soft prick slipping out of an overheated cunt I,   
the still unhatched, making a few abortive wriggles, but either not dead and soft enough or   
else sperm-free and skating ad astra, for it is still not dinner and a peristaltic frenzy   
takes possession of the upper colon, the hypo-gastric region, the umbilical and the post- 
pineal lobe. Boiled alive, the lobsters swim in ice, giving no quarter and asking no   
quarter, simply motionless and unmotivated in the ice-watered ennui of death, life drifting   
by the show-window muffled in desolation, a sorrowful scurvy eaten away by ptomaine, the   
frozen glass of the window cutting like a jack-knife, dean and no remainder. 
 
Life drifting by the show-window ... I too as much a part of life as the lobster, the   
fourteen carat ring, the horse liniment, but very difficult to establish the fact, the fact   
being that life is merchandise with a bill of lading attached, what I choose to eat being   
more important than I the eater, each one eating the other and consequently eating,    the   
verb    ruler of the roost. In the act of eating the host is violated and justice defeated   
tempor- 
 
92 
 
arily. The plate and what's on it, through the predatory power of the intestinal apparatus,   
commands attention and unifies the spirit, first hypnotizing it, then slowly swallowing it,   
then masticating it, then absorbing it. The spiritual part of the being passes off like a   
scum, leaves absolutely no evidence or trace of its passage, vanishes, vanishes even more   
completely than a point in space after a mathematical discourse. The fever, which may   
return tomorrow, bears the same relation to life as the mercury in a thermometer bears to   
heat. Fever will not make life heat, which is what was to have been proved and thus   
consecrates the meat balls and spaghetti. To chew while thousands chew, each chew an act of   
murder, gives the necessary social cast from which you look out the window and see that   
even human kind can be slaughtered justly, or maimed, or starved, or tortured because,   
while chewing, the mere advantage of sitting in a chair with clothes on, wiping the mouth   
with napkin, enables you to comprehend, what the wisest men have never been able to   
comprehend, namely that there is no other way of life possible, said wise men often,   
 59 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
When is it 
 
 
 
 
disdaining to use chair, clothes or napkin. Thus men scurrying through a cunty deft of a   
street called Broadway every day at regular hours, in search of this or that, tend to   
establish this and that, which is exactly the method of mathematicians, logicians,   
physicists, astronomers and such like. The proof is the fact and the fact has no meaning   
except what is given to it by those who establish the facts. 
 
The meat balk devoured, the paper napkin carefully thrown on the floor, belching a trifle   
and not knowing why or whither, I step out into the 24 carat sparkle and with the theatre   
pack. This time I wander through the side streets following a blind man with an accordion.   
Now and then I sit on a stoop and listen to an aria. At the opera, the music makes no   
sense; here in the street it has just the right demented touch to give it poignancy. The   
woman who accompanies the blind man holds a tin cup in her hands; he is a part of life too   
like the tin cup, like the music of Verdi, like the M etropolitan Opera House. Everybody and   
everything is a part of life, but when they have all been added together, still somehow it   
is not life. 
 
93 
 
life, I ask myself, and why not now? The blind man wanders on and I remain sitting on the   
stoop. The meat balls were rotten: the coffee was lousy, the butter was rancid. Everything   
I look at is rotten, lousy, rancid. The street is like a bad breath; the next street is the   
same, and the next and the next. At the comer the blind man stops again and plays "Home to   
Our Mountains". I find a piece of chewing gum in my pocket -1 chew it. I chew for the sake   
of chewing. There is absolutely nothing better to do unless it were to make a decision,   
which is impossible. The stoop is comfortable and nobody is bothering me. I am part of the   
world, of life, as they say, and I belong and I don't belong. 
 
I sit on the stoop for an hour or so, mooning. I come to the same conclusions I always come   
to when I have a minute to think for myself. Either I must go home immediately and start to   
write or I must run away and start a wholly new life. The thought of beginning a book   
terrifies me: there is so much to tell that I don't know where or how to begin. The thought   
of running away and beginning all over again is equally terrifying: it means working like a   
nigger to keep body and soul together. For a man of my temperament, the world being what it   
is, there is absolutely no hope, no solution. Even if I    could    write the book I want to   
write nobody would take it -1 know my compatriots only too well. Even if I    could    begin   
again it would be no use, because fundamentally I have no desire to work and no desire to   
become a useful member of society. I sit there staring at the house across the way. It   
seems not only ugly and senseless, like all the other houses on the street, but from   
staring at it so intently, it has suddenly become absurd. The idea of constructing a place   
of shelter in that particular way strikes me as absolutely insane. The city itself strikes   
me as a piece of the highest insanity, everything about it, sewers, elevated lines, slot   
machines, newspapers, telephones, cops, doorknobs, flop houses, screens, toilet paper,   
everything. Everything could just as well not be and not only nothing lost by a whole   
universe gained. I look at the people brushing by me to see if by chance one of them might   
 60 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agree with me. Supposing I intercepted one of them and just asked him a simple question.   
Supposing I just 
 
94 
 
said to him suddenly:    "Why do you go on living the way you do?" He would probably call a   
cop. I ask myself - does any one ever talk to himself the way I do? I ask myself if there   
isn't something wrong with me. The only conclusion I can come to is    that I am different.   
And that's a very grave matter, view it how you will. Henry, I say to myself, rising slowly   
from the stoop, stretching myself, brushing my trousers and spitting out the gum. Henry, I   
say to myself, you are young yet, you are just a spring chicken and if you let them get you   
by the balls you're an idiot because you're a better man than any of them only you need to   
get rid of your false notions about humanity. You have to realize Henry me boy, that you're   
dealing    with    cut-throats,    with    cannibals,    only    they're    dressed-up,    shaved,    perfumed,    but   
that's all they are - cut-throats, cannibals. The best thing for you to do now. Henry, is   
to go and get yourself a frosted chocolate and when you sit at the soda fountain keep your   
eyes peeled and forget about the destiny of man because you might still find yourself a   
nice lay and a good dean lay will dean your ballbearing out and leave a good taste in your   
mouth whereas this only brings on dyspepsia, dandruff, halitosis, encephalitis. And while   
I'm soothing myself thus a guy comes up to me to bum a dime and I hand him a quarter for   
good measure thinking to myself that if I had had a little more sense I'd have had a juicy   
pork chop with that instead of the lousy meat balls but what the difference now it's all   
food and food makes energy and energy is what makes the world go round. Instead of the   
frosted chocolate I keep walking and soon I'm exactly where I intended to be all the time,   
which is front of the ticket window of the Roseland. And now. Henry, says I to myself, if   
you're lucky your old pal MacGregor will be here and first hell bawl the shit out of you   
for running away and then he'll lend you a five-spot, and if you just hold your breath   
while climbing the stairs maybe you'll see the nymphomaniac too and you'll get a dry fuck.   
Enter very calmly. Henry, and keep your eyes peeled! And I enter as per instructions on   
velvet    toes,    checking    my    hat    and    urinating    a    little    as    a    matter    of    course,    then    slowly   
redescending the stairs and sizing up the taxi girls all diaphanously gowned, powdered,   
perfumed, looking fresh and alert but probably 
 
95 
 
bored as hell and leg weary. Into each and every one of them, as I shuffle about, I throw   
an imaginary fuck. The place is just plastered with cunt and fuck and that's why I'm   
reasonably sure to find my old friend M acGregor here. The way I no longer think about the   
condition of the world is marvellous. I mention it because for a moment, just while I was   
studying a juicy ass, I had a relapse. I almost went into a trance again. I was thinking,   
Christ help me, that maybe I ought to beat it and go home and begin the book. A terrifying   
thought! Once I spent a whole evening sitting in a chair and saw nothing and heard nothing.   
I must have written a good sized book before I woke up. Better not to sit down. Better to   
keep circulating. Henry, what you ought to do is to come here some time with a lot of dough   
 61 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
Don't sit down ... keep moving. 
 
 
 
 
and just see how far it'll take you. I mean a hundred or two hundred bucks, and spend it   
like water and say yes to everything. The haughty looking one with the statuesque figure, I   
bet she'd squirm like an eel if her palm were well greased. Supposing she said -    twenty   
bucks!    and you could say    Sure!    Supposing you could say - Listen, I've got a car   
downstairs ... let's run down to Atlantic City for a few days. Henry, there ain't no car   
and there ain't no twenty bucks. 
 
At the rail which fences off the floor I stand and watch them sailing around. This is no   
harmless recreation... this is serious business. At each end of the floor there is a sign   
reading "No Improper Dancing Allowed". Well and good. No harm in placing a sign at each end   
of the floor. In Pompei they probably hung a phallus up. This is the American way. It means   
the same thing. I mustn't think about Pompei or I'll be sitting down and writing a book   
again. Keep moving Henry. Keep your mind on the music. I keep struggling to imagine what a   
lovely time I would have had if I had the price of a string of tickets, but the more I   
struggle the more I slip back. Finally I'm standing knee-deep in the lava beds and the gas   
is choking me. It wasn't the lava that killed the Pompeians, it was the poison gas that   
predpitated the eruption. That's how the lava caught them in such queer poses, with their   
pants down, as it were. If suddenly all New York were caught that way - what a museum 
 
96 
 
it would make! My friend MacGregor standing at the sink scrubbing his cock... the   
abortionists on the East Side caught red-handed ... the nuns laying in bed and masturbating   
one another ... the auctioneer with an alarm in his hand ... the telephone girls at the   
switchboard ... J. P. Morganana sitting on the toilet bowl placidly wiping his ass ... the   
dicks with rubber hoses giving the third degree ... strippers giving the last strip and   
tease... 
 
Standing knee-deep in the lava beds and my eyes choked with sperm; J. P. Morganana is   
placidly wiping his ass while the telephone girls plug the switchboards, while dicks with   
rubber hoses practice the third degree, while my old friend M acGregor scrubs the germs out   
of his cock and sweetens it and examines it under the microscope. Everybody is caught with   
his pants down, including the strip teasers who wear no pants, no beards, no moustaches,   
just a little patch to cover their twinkling little cunts. Sister Antolina lying in the   
convent bed, her guts trussed up, her arms akimbo and waiting for the Resurrection,   
waiting, waiting for life without hernia, without intercourse, without sin, without evil,   
meanwhile nibbling a few animal crackers, a pimento, some fancy olives, a little head   
cheese. The Jew-boys on the East Side, in Harlem, the Bronx, Carnarsie, Bronville, opening   
and dosing the trapdoors, pulling out arms and legs, turning the sausage machine, dogging   
up the drains, working like fury for cash down and if you let a peep out of you out you go.   
With    eleven    hundred    tickets    in    my    pocket    and    a    Rolls    Royce    waiting    for    me    downstairs    I   
could have the most excruciatingly marvellous time, throwing a fuck into each and everyone   
respectively regardless of age, sex, race, religion, nationality, birth or breeding. There   
is no solution for a man like myself, I being what I am and the world being what it is. The   
 62 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world is divided into three parts of which two parts are meat balls and spaghetti and the   
other part a huge syphilitic chancre. The haughty one with the statuesque figure is   
probably a cold turkey fuck, a sort of con anonyme plastered with gold leaf and tin foil.   
Beyond despair and disillusionment there is always the absence of worse things and the   
emoluments of ennui. Nothing is lousier and emptier than the midst of bright 
 
97 
 
gaiety clicked by the mechanical eye of the mechanical epoch, life maturating in a black   
box, a negative tickled with add and yielding a momentaneous simulacrum of nothingness. At   
the outermost limit of this momentaneous nothingness my friend MacGregor arrives and is   
standing by my side and with him is the one he was talking about, the nymphomaniac called   
Paula. She has the loose, jaunty swing and perch of the double-barrelled sex, all her   
movements radiating from the groin, always in equilibrium, always ready to flow, to wind   
and twist, and clutch, the eyes going tic-toc, the toes twitching and twinkling, the flesh   
rippling like a lake furrowed by a breeze. This is the incarnation of the hallucination of   
sex, the sea nymph squirming in the maniac's arms. I watch the two of them as they move   
spasmodically inch by inch around the floor; they move like an octopus working up a rut.   
Between the dangling tentacles the music shimmers and flashes, now breaks in a cascade of   
sperm and rose water, forms again into an oily spout, a column standing erect without feet,   
collapses again like chalk, leaving the upper part of the leg phosphorescent, a zebra   
standing in a pool of golden marshmallow, one leg striped, the other molten. A gold   
marshmallow octopus with rubber hinges and molten hooves, its sex undone and twisted into a   
knot. On the sea floor the oysters are doing the St. Vitus dance, some with lockjaw, some   
with double-jointed knees. The music is sprinkled with rat poison, with the rattlesnake's   
venom, with the fetid breath of the gardenia, the spittle of the sacred yak, the bolloxed   
sweat of the musk-rat, the leper's sugar-coated nostalgia. The music is a diarrhoea, a lake   
of gasolene, stagnant with cockroaches and stale horse piss. The drooling notes are the   
foam and dribble of the epileptic, the night sweat of the fornicating nigger frigged by the   
Jew. All America is in the trombone's smear, that frazzled brokendown whinny of the   
gangrened sea cows stationed off Point Loma, Pawtucket, Cape Hatteras, Labrador, Camarsie   
and intermediate points. The octopus is dancing like a rubber dick - the rhumba of Spuyten   
Duyvil inedit. Laura the nympho is doing the rhumba, her sex exfoliated and twisted like a   
cow's tail. In the belly of the trombone lies the American soul farting its contented heart   
 
98 
 
out. Nothing goes to waste - not the least spit of a fart. In the golden marshmallow dream   
of    happiness,    in    the    dance    of    sodden    piss    and    gasolene,    the    great    soul    of    the    American   
continent gallops like an octopus, all the sails unfurled, the hatches down, the engine   
whirring like a dynamo. The great dynamic soul caught in the click of the camera's eye, in   
the heat of rut, bloodless as a fish, slippery as mucus, the soul of the people   
miscegenating on the sea floor, pop-eyed with longing, harrowed with lust. The dance of   
Saturday night, of cantaloupes rotting in the garbage pail, of fresh green snot and slimy   
 63 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unguents for the tender parts. The dance of the slot-machine and the monsters who invent   
them. The dance of the gat and the slugs who use them. The dance of the blackjack and the   
pricks who batter brains to a polypous pulp. The dance of the magneto world, the spark that   
unsparks, the soft purr of the perfect mechanism, the velocity race on a turntable, the   
dollar at par and the forests dead and mutilated. The Saturday night of the soul's hollow   
dance, each jumping jigger a functional unit in the St. Vitus' dance of the ringworm's   
dream. Laura    the    nympho brandishing her cunt, her sweet rose-petal lips toothed with   
ballbearing clutches, her ass balled and socketed. Inch by inch, millimetre by .millimetre   
they shove the copulating corpse around. And then crash! Like pulling a switch the music   
suddenly stops and with the stoppage the dancers come apart, arms and legs intact, like tea   
leaves dropping to the bottom of the cup. Now the air is blue with words, a slow sizzle as   
of fish on the griddle. The chaff of the empty soul rising like monkey chatter in the   
topmost branches of the trees. The air blue with words passing out through the ventilators,   
coming back again in sleep through corrugated funnels and smokestacks, winged like the   
antelope, striped like the zebra, now lying quiet as the mollusc, now spitting flame. Laura   
the nympho cold as a statue, her parts eaten away, her hair musically enraptured. On the   
brink of sleep Laura stands with muted lips, her words falling like pollen through a fog.   
The Laura of Petrarque seated in a taxi, each word ringing through the cash register, then   
sterilized, then cauterized. Laura the basilisk made entirely of asbestos, walking to the   
fiery stake with a 
 
99 
 
mouth full of gum. Hunkydory is the word on her lips. The heavy fluted Ups of the sea- 
shell. Laura's lips, the lips of lost Uranian love. All floating shadow-ward through the   
slanting fog. Last murmuring dregs of shell-like lips slipping off the Labrador coast,   
oozing eastward with the mud tides, easing starward in the iodine drift. Lost Laura, last   
of the Petrarques, slowly fading on the brink of sleep. Not grey the world, but lustlack,   
the light bamboo sleep of spoon-backed innocence. 
 
And tins in the black frenzied nothingness of the hollow of absence leaves a gloomy feeling   
of saturated despondency not unlike the topmost tip of desperation which is only the gay   
juvenile maggot of death's exquisite rupture with life. From this inverted cone of ecstasy   
life will rise again into prosaic skyscraper eminence, dragging me by the hair and teeth,   
lousy with howling empty joy, the animated foetus of the unborn death maggot lying in wait   
for rot and putrefaction. 
 
Sunday morning the telephone wakes me up. It's my friend Maxie Schnadig announcing the   
death of our friend Luke Ralston. Maxie has assumed a truly sorrowful tone of voice which   
rubs me the wrong way. He says Luke was such a swell guy. That too sounds the wrong note   
for me because while Luke was all right, he was only so-so, not precisely what you might   
call a swell guy. Luke was an ingrown fairy and finally, when I got to know him intimately,   
a big pain in the ass. I told Maxie that over the telephone: I could tell from the way he   
answered me that he didn't like it very much. He said Luke had always been a friend to me.   
 64 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was true enough, but it wasn't enough. The truth was that I was really glad Luke had   
kicked    off    at    the    opportune    moment:    it    meant    that    I    could    forget    about    the    hundred    and   
fifty dollars which I owed him In fact, as I hung up the receiver I really felt joyous. It   
was a tremendous relief not to have to pay that debt. As for Luke's demise, that didn't   
disturb me in the least. On the contrary, it would enable me to pay a visit to his sister,   
Lottie, whom I always wanted to lay but never could for one reason or another. Now I could   
see myself going up there in the middle of the day and offering her my condolences. Her   
husband would be at the office and there 
 
100 
 
would be nothing to interfere. I saw myself putting my arms around her and comforting her;   
nothing like tackling a woman when she is in sorrow. I could see her opening her eyes wide   
-she had beautiful, large grey eyes - as I moved her towards the couch. She was the sort of   
woman who would give you a fuck while pretending to be talking music or some such thing.   
She didn't like the naked reality, the bare facts, so to speak. At the same time she'd have   
enough presence of mind to slip a towel under her so as not to stain the couch. I knew her   
inside out. I knew that the best time to get her was now, now while she was running up a   
little fever of emotion over dear dead Luke -whom she didn't think much of, by the way.   
Unfortunately it was Sunday and the husband would be sure to be home. I went back to bed   
and I lay    there thinking first about Luke and all that he had done for me and then about   
her, Lottie. Lottie Somers was her name - it always seemed a beautiful name to me. It   
matched her perfectly. Luke was stiff as a poker, with a sort of skull and bones face, and   
impeccable and just beyond words. She was just the opposite - soft, round, spoke with a   
drawl, caressed her words, moved languidly, used her eyes effectively. One would never take   
them for brother and sister. I got so worked up thinking about her that I tried to tackle   
the wife. But that poor bastard, with her Puritanical complex, pretended to be horrified.   
She liked Luke. She wouldn't say that he was a swell guy, because that wasn't like her, but   
she insisted that he was genuine, loyal, a true friend, etc. I had so many loyal, genuine,   
true friends that that was all horse shit to me. Finally we got into such an argument over   
Luke that she got an hysterical attack and began to weep and sob - in bed, mind you. That   
made me hungry. The idea of weeping before breakfast seemed monstrous to me. I went   
downstairs and I fixed myself a wonderful breakfast, and as I put it away I was laughing to   
myself, about Luke, about the hundred and fifty bucks that his sudden death had wiped off   
the slate, about Lottie and the way she would look at me when the moment came . . . and   
finally, the most absurd of all, I thought of M axie, Maxie Schnadig, the faithful friend of   
Luke, standing at the grave with a big wreath and perhaps throwing a handful of  
 
101 
 
earth on the coffin just as they were lowering it. Somehow that seemed just too stupid for   
words. I don't know why it should seem so ridiculous, but it did. Maxie was a simpleton. I   
tolerated him only because he was good for a touch now and then. And then too there was his   
sister Rita. I used to let him invite me to his home occasionally, pretending that I was   
 65 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in his brother who was deranged. It was always a good meal and the halfwitted   
brother was real entertainment. He looked like a chimpanzee and he talked like one too.   
Maxie was too simple to suspect that I was merely enjoying myself; he thought I took a   
genuine interest in his brother. 
 
It was a beautiful Sunday and I had as usual about a quarter in my pocket. I walked along   
wondering where to go to make a touch. Not that it was difficult to scrape up a little   
dough, no, but the thing was to get the dough and beat it without being bored stiff. I   
could think of a dozen guys right in the neighbourhood, guys who would fork it out without   
a murmur, but it would mean a long conversation afterwards - about art, religion, politics.   
Another thing I could do, which I had done over and over again in a pinch, was to visit the   
telegraph offices, pretending to pay a friendly visit of inspection and then, at the last   
minute, suggesting that they rifle the till for a buck or so until the morrow. That would   
involve time and even worse conversation. Thinking it over coldly and calculatingly I   
decided that the best bet was my little friend Curley up in Harlem. If Curley didn't have   
the money he would filch it from his mother's purse. I knew I could rely on him. He would   
want to accompany me, of course, but I could always find a way of ditching him before the   
evening was over. He was only a kid and I didn't have to be too delicate with him. 
 
What I liked about Curley was, that although only a kid of seventeen, he had absolutely no   
moral sense, no scruples, no shame. He had come to me as a boy of fourteen looking for a   
job as messenger. His parents, who were then in South America, had shipped him to New York   
in care of an aunt who seduced him almost immediately. He had never been to school because   
the parents were always travelling; they were carnival people who worked "the griffs and   
the grinds", as he put it. The father 
 
102 HENKY MILLER 
 
had been in prison several times. He was not his real father, by the way. Anyway, Curley   
came to me as a mere lad who was in need of help, in need of a friend more than anything.   
At first I thought I could do something for him. Everybody took a liking to hira   
immediately, especially the women. He became the pet of the office. Before long, however, I   
realized that he was incomgible, that at the best he had the makings of a clever criminal.   
I liked him, however, and I continued to do things for him, but I never trusted him out of   
my sight. I think I liked him particularly because he had absolutely no sense of honour. He   
would do anything in the world for me and at the same time betray me. I couldn't reproach   
him for it... It was amusing to me. The more so because he was frank about it. He just   
couldn't help it. His Aunt Sophie, for instance. He said she had seduced him. True enough,   
but the curious thing was that he let himself be seduced while they were reading the Bible   
together. Young as he was he seemed to realize that his Aunt Sophie had need of him in that   
way. So he let himself be seduced, as he said, and then, after I had known him a little   
while he offered to put me next to his Aunt Sophie. He even went so far as to blackmail   
her. When he needed money badly he would go to the aunt and wheedle it out of her - with   
sly threats of exposure. With an innocent face, to be sure. He looked amazingly like an   
 66 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
angel, with big liquid eyes that seemed so frank and sincere. So ready to do things for you   
- almost like a faithful dog. And then cunning enough, once he had gained your favour, to   
make you humour his little whims. Withal extremely intelligent. The sly intelligence of a   
fox and - the utter heartlessness of a jackal. 
 
It wasn't at all surprising to me, consequently, to learn that afternoon that he had been   
tinkering with Valeska. After Valeska he tackled the cousin who had already been deflowered   
and who was in need of some male whom she could rely upon. And from her finally to the   
midget who had made herself a pretty little nest at Valeska's. The midget interested him   
because she had a perfectly normal cant. He hadn't intended to do anything with her   
because, as he said, she was a repulsive little Lesbian, but one day he happened to walk in   
on her as she was taking a bath, and that started things off. It was getting to be too much   
 
103 
 
for him, he confessed, because the three of them were hot on bis trail. He liked the cousin   
best because she had some dough and she wasn't reluctant to part with it. Valeska was too   
cagey, and besides she smelled a little too strong. In fact, he was getting sick of women.   
He said it was his Aunt Sophie's fault. She gave him a bad start. While relating this he   
busies himself going through the bureau drawers. The father is a mean son of a bitch who   
ought to be hanged, he says, not finding anything immediately. He showed me a revolver with   
a pearl handle... what would it fetch? A gun was too good to use on the old man ... he'd   
like to dynamite him. Trying to find out why he hated the old man so it developed that the   
kid was really stuck on his mother. He couldn't bear the thought of the old man going to   
bed with her. You don't mean to say that you're jealous of your old man, I ask. Yes, he's   
jealous. If I wanted to know the truth it's that he wouldn't mind sleeping with his mother.   
Why not? That's why he had permitted his Aunt Sophie to seduce him... he was thinking of   
his mother all the time. But don't you feel bad when you go through her pocketbook, I   
asked. He laughed. It's not    her    money he said, it's    his.    And what have they done for me?   
They were always farming me out. The first thing they taught me was how to cheat people.   
That's a hell of a way to raise a kid... 
 
There's not a red cent in the house. Curley's idea of a way out is to go with me to the   
office where he works and while I engage the manager in conversation go through the   
wardrobe and dean out all the loose change. Or, if I'm not afraid of taking a chance, he   
will go through the cash drawer. They'll never suspect us, he says. Had he ever done that   
before, I ask. Of course ... a dozen or more times, right under the manager's nose. And   
wasn't there any stink about it? To be sure ... they had fired a few clerks. Why don't you   
borrow something from your Aunt Sophie, I suggest. That's easy enough, only it means a   
quick diddle and he doesn't want to diddle her any more. She stinks. Aunt Sophie. What do   
you mean,    she stinks?    Just that ... she doesn't wash herself regularly. Why, what's the   
matter with her? Nothing, just religious. And getting fat and greasy at die same time. But   
she likes to be diddled just the same? Does 
 
 
 
 67 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
104 
 
she? She's crazier than ever about it. It's disgusting. It's like going to bed with a sow.   
What does your mother think about her?    Her?    She's as sore as hell at her. She thinks   
Sophie's trying to seduce the old man. Well, maybe she is! No, the old man's got something   
else. I caught him red-handed one night, in the movies, mushing it up with a young girl.   
She's a manicurist from the Astor Hotel. He's probably trying to squeeze a little dough out   
of her. That's the only reason he ever makes a woman. He's a dirty, mean son of a bitch and   
I'd like to see him get the chair some day! You'll get the chair yourself some day if you   
don't watch out. Who, me ? Not me ! I'm too clever. You're clever enough but you've got a   
loose tongue. I'd be a little more tight-lipped if I were you. You know, I added, to give   
him an extra jolt, O'Rourke is wise to you; if you ever fall out with O'Rourke it's all up   
with you . . . Well, why doesn't he say something if he's so wise? I don't believe you. 
 
I explain to him at some length that O'Rourke is one of those people, and there are damned   
few in the world, who prefer    not    to make trouble for another person if they can help it.   
O'Rourke, I say, has the detective's instinct only in that he likes to know what's going on   
around him: people's characters are plotted out in his head, and filed there permanently,   
just as the enemy's terrain is fixed in the minds of army leaders. People think that   
O'Rourke goes around snooping and spying, that he derives a special pleasure in performing   
this dirty work for the company. Not so. O'Rourke is a born student of human nature. He   
picks things up without effort, due, to be sure, to his peculiar way  of looking at the   
world. Now about you ... I have no doubt that he knows everything about you. I never asked   
him, I admit, but I imagine so from the questions he poses now and then. Perhaps he's just   
giving you plenty of rope. Some night he'll run into you accidentally and perhaps he'll ask   
you to stop off somewhere and have a bite to eat with him. And out of a dear sky he'll   
suddenly say - you remember, Curley, when you were working up in SA office, the time that   
little Jewish clerk was fired for tapping the till? I think you were working overtime that   
night, weren't you? An interesting case, that. You know, they never discovered whether the   
clerk stole the money 
 
105 
 
or not. They had to fire him, of course, for negligence, but we can't say for certain that   
he really stole the money. I've been thinking about that little affair now for quite some   
time. I have a hunch as to who took that money, but I'm not absolutely sure . . . And then   
he'll probably give you a beady eye and abruptly change the conversation to something else.   
He'll probably tell you a little story about a crook he knew who thought he was very smart   
and getting away with it. He'll draw that story out for you until you feel as though you   
were sitting on hot coals. By that time you'll be wanting to beat it, but just when you're   
ready to go he'll suddenly be reminded of another very interesting little case and he'll   
ask you to wait just a little longer while he orders another dessert. And he'll go on like   
that for three or four hours at a stretch, never making the least overt insinuation, but   
studying you closely all the time, and finally, when you think you're free, just when   
 68 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you're shaking hands with him and breathing a sigh of relief, he'll step in front of you   
and, planting his big square feet between your legs, he'll grab you by the lapel and,   
looking straight through you, he'll say in a soft winsome voice -    now look here, my lad,     
don't you think you had better come clean?    And if you think he's only trying to browbeat   
you and that you can pretend innocence and walk away, you're mistaken. Because at that   
point, when he asks you to come clean, he means business and nothing on earth is going to   
stop him. When it gets to that point I'd recommend you to make a clean sweep of it, down to   
the last penny. He won't ask me to fire you and he won't threaten you with jail - he'll   
just quietly suggest that you put aside a little bit each week and turn it over to him.   
Nobody    will    be    the    wiser.    He    probably    won't    even    tell    me.    No,    he's    very    delicate    about   
these things, you see." 
 
"And supposing," says Curley suddenly, "that I tell him I stole the money in order to help   
you out? What then?" He began to laugh hysterically. 
 
"I don't think O'Rourke would believe that," I said calmly. "You can try it, of course, if   
you think it will help you to dear your own skirts. But I rather think it will have a bad   
effect. O'Rourke knows me ... he knows I wouldn't let you do a thing like that." 
 
106 
 
"But you did let me do it!" 
 
"I didn't tell you to do it. You did it without my knowledge. That's quite different.   
Besides, can you prove that I accepted money from you? Won't it seem a little ridiculous to   
accuse me, the one who befriended you, of putting you up to a job like that? Who's going to   
believe you? Not O'Rourke. Besides, he hasn't trapped you yet. Why worry about it in   
advance? Maybe you could begin to return the money little by little before he gets after   
you. Do it anonymously." 
 
By this time Curley was quite used up. There was a little schnapps in the cupboard which   
his old man kept in reserve and I suggested that we take a little to brace us up. As we   
were drinking the schnapps it suddenly occurred to me that Maxie had said he would be at   
Luke's house to pay his respects. It was just the moment to get M axie. He would be full of   
slobbering sentiments and I could give him any old kind of cock-and-bull story. I could say   
that the reason I had assumed such a hard-boiled air on the phone was because I was   
harassed, because I didn't know where to turn for the ten dollars which I needed so badly.   
At the same time I might be able to make a date with Lottie. I began to smile thinking   
about it. If Luke could only see what a friend he had in me! The most difficult thing would   
be to go up to the bier and take a sorrowful look at Luke. 
 
I explained the idea to Curley. He laughed so heartily that the tears were rolling down his   
face. Which convinced me, by the way, that it would be safer to leave Curley downstairs   
while I made the touch. Anyway, it was decided on. 
 
Not to.laugh! 
 69 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They were just sitting down to dinner when I walked in, looking as sad as I could possibly   
make myself look. M axie was there and almost shocked by my sudden appearance. Lottie had   
gone already. That helped me to keep up the sad look. I asked to be alone with Luke a few   
minutes, but Maxie insisted on accompanying me. The others were relieved, I imagine, as   
they had been conducting the mourners to the bier all afternoon. And like the good Germans   
they were they didn't like having their dinner interrupted. As I was looking at Luke, still   
with that sorrowful expression I had mustered, I became aware of 
 
107 
 
Maxie's eyes fixed on me inquisitively. I looked up and smiled at him in my usual way. He   
seemed absolutely nonplussed at this. "Listen, M axie," I said, "are you sure they won't   
hear us?" He looked still more puzzled and grieved, but nodded reassuringly. "It's like   
this, Maxie... I came up here purposely to see you ... to borrow a few bucks. I know it   
seems lousy but you can imagine how desperate I must be to do a thing like this." He was   
shaking    his head    solemnly as    I spit    this out,    his mouth    forming a    big 0    as if    he were   
trying to frighten the spirits away. "Listen, Maxie," I went on rapidly and trying to keep   
my voice down sad and low, "this is no time to give me a sermon. If you want to do   
something for me lend me ten bucks now, right away . .. slip it to me right here while I   
look at Luke. You know, I really liked Luke. I didn't mean all that over the telephone. You   
got me at a bad moment. The wife was tearing her hair out. We're in a mess, Maxie, and I'm   
counting on you to do something. Come out with me if you can and I'll tell you more about   
it.. .*' Maxie, as I had expected, couldn't come out with me. He wouldn't think of   
deserting    them    at    such    a    moment..."    Well,    give    it    to    me    now,"    I    said,    almost    savagely.   
"I'll explain the whole thing to you tomorrow. I'll have lunch with you downtown." 
 
"Listen, Henry," says Maxie, fishing around in his pocket, embarrassed at the idea of being   
caught with a wad in his hand at that moment, "listen," he said, "I don't mind giving you   
the    money,    but    couldn't    you    have    found    another    way    of    reaching    me?    It    isn't    because    of   
Luke... it's..." He began to hem and haw, not knowing really what he wanted to say. 
 
"For Christ's sake," I muttered, bending over Luke more closely so that if any one walked   
in on us they would never suspect what I was up to ... "for Christ's sake, don't argue   
about it now... hand it over and be done with it... I'm desperate, do you hear me?" Maxie   
was so confused and flustered that he couldn't disengage a bill without pulling the wad out   
of his pocket. Leaning over the coffin reverendy I peeled off the topmost bill from the wad   
which was peeping out of his pocket. I couldn't tell whether it was a single or a ten-spot.   
I didn't stop to examine it but tucked it away as rapidly as possible and  
 
I08 
 
straightened myself up. Then I took M axie by the arm and returned to the kitchen where the   
family were eating solemnly but heartily. They wanted me to stay for a bite, and it was   
awkward to refuse, but I refused as best I could and beat it, my face twitching now with   
 
 
 70 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
hysterical laughter. 
 
At the comer, by the lamp post, Curley was waiting for me. By this time I couldn't restrain   
myself any longer. I grabbed Curley by the arm and rushing him down the street I began to   
laugh, to laugh as I have seldom laughed in my life. I thought it would never stop. Every   
time I opened my mouth to start explaining the incident I had an attack. Finally I got   
frightened. I thought maybe I might laugh myself to death. After I had managed to quiet   
down a bit, in the midst of a long silence. Cur-ley suddenly says: "Did you get it?" That   
precipitated another attack, even more violent than before. I had to lean against a rail   
and hold my guts. I had a terrific pain in the guts but a pleasurable pain. 
 
What relieved me more than anything was the sight of the bill I had filched from M axie's   
wad.    It was    a twenty    dollar bill!    That sobered    me up    at once.    And at    the same    time it   
enraged me a bit. It enraged me to think that in the pocket of that idiot, Maxie, there   
were still more bills, probably more twenties, more tens, more fives. If he had come out   
with me, as I suggested, and if I had taken a good look at that wad I would have felt no   
remorse in blackjacking him. I don't know why it should have made me feel so, but it   
enraged me. The most immediate thought was to get rid of Curley as quickly as possible - a   
five-spot would fix him up - and then go on a little spree. What I particularly wanted was   
to meet some low-down, filthy cunt who hadn't a spark of decency in her. Where to meet one   
like that. . . just like that? Well, get rid of Curley first. Curley, of course, is hurt.   
He had expected to stick with me. He pretends not to want the five bucks, but when be sees   
that I'm willing to take it back, he quickly stows it away. 
 
Again the night, the incalculably barren, cold, mechanical night of New York in which there   
is no peace, no refuge, no intimacy. The immense, frozen solitude of the million-footed   
mob, the cold, waste fire of the electrical display, the over- 
 
109 
 
whelming meaningless of the perfection of the female who through perfection has crossed the   
frontier of sex and gone into the minus sign, gone into the red, like the electricity, like   
the neutral energy of the males, like planets without aspect, like peace programmes, like   
love over the radio. To have money in the pocket in the midst of white, neutral energy, to   
walk meaningless and unfecundated through the bright glitter of the calcimined streets, to   
think aloud in full solitude on the edge of madness, to be of a city, a great city, to be   
of the last moment of time in the greatest city in the world and feel no part of it, is to   
become oneself a city, a world of dead stone, of waste light, of unintelligible motion, of   
imponderables and incalculables, of the secret perfection of all that is minus. To walk in   
money through the night crowd, protected by money, lulled by money, dulled by money, the   
crowd itself a money, the breath money, no least single object anywhere that is not money,   
money, money everywhere and still not enough, and then no money or a little money or less   
money or more money, but money, always money, and if you have money or you don't have money   
it is the money that counts and money makes money, 
 
 71 
 216 
 
   
but what makes money make money ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Again the dance hall, the money rhythm, the love that comes over the radio, the impersonal,   
wingless touch of the crowd. A despair that reaches down to the very soles of the boots, an   
ennui, a desperation. In the midst of the highest mechanical perfection to dance without   
joy, to be so desperately alone, to be almost inhuman because you are human. If there were   
life on the moon what more nearly perfect, joyless evidence of it could there be than this.   
If    to travel    away from    the sun    is to    reach the    chill idiocy    of the    moon, then    we have   
arrived at our goal and life is but the cold, lunar incandescence of the sun. This is the   
dance of ice-cold life in the hollow of an atom, and the more we dance the colder it gets. 
 
So we dance, to an ice-cold frenzied rhythm, to short waves and long waves, a dance on the   
inside of the cup of nothingness, each centimetre of lust running to dollars and cents. We   
taxi from one perfect female to another seeking the vulnerable 
 
110 
 
defect, but they are flawless and impermeable in the impeccable lunar consistency. This is   
the icy white maidenhead of love's logic, the web of the ebbed tide, the fringe of absolute   
vacuity. And on this fringe of the virginal logic of perfection I am dancing the soul dance   
of white desperation, the last white man pulling the trigger on the last emotion, the   
gorilla of despair beating his breast with immaculate gloved paws. I am the gorilla who   
feels his wings growing, a giddy gorilla in the centre of a satin-like emptiness; the night   
too grows like an electrical plant, shooting white-hot buds into velvet black space. I am   
the black space of the night in which the buds break with anguish, a starfish swimming on   
the frozen dew of the moon. I am the germ of a new insanity, a freak dressed in   
intelligible language, a sob that is buried like a splinter in the quick of the soul. I am   
dancing the very sane and lovely dance of the angelic gorilla. These are my brothers and   
sisters who are insane and unangelic. We are dancing in the hollow of the cup of   
nothingness. We are of one flesh, but separated like stars. 
 
In the moment all is dear to me, dear that in this logic there is no redemption, the city   
itself being the highest form of madness and each and every part, organic or inorganic, an   
expression of this same madness. I feel absurdly and humbly great, not as megalomaniac, but   
as human spore, as the dead sponge of life swollen to saturation. I no longer look into the   
eyes of the woman I hold in my arms but I swim through, head and arms and legs, and I see   
that behind the sockets of the eyes there is a region unexplored, the world of futurity,   
and here there is no logic whatever, just the still germination of events unbroken by night   
and day, by yesterday and tomorrow. The eye, accustomed to concentration on points in   
space, now concentrates on points in time; the eye sees forward and backward at will. The   
eye which was the I of the self no longer exists; this selfless eye neither reveals nor   
illuminates. It travels along the line of the horizon, a ceaseless, uninformed voyager.   
Trying to retain the lost body I grew in logic as the city, a point digit in the anatomy of   
perfection. I grew beyond my own death, spiritually bright and hard. I was divided into   
endless yesterdays, endless tomorrows, resting only on the cusp of the event, a wall with 
 
 
 
 72 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
111 
 
many windows, but the house gone. I must shatter the walls and windows, the last shell of   
the lost body, if I am to rejoin the present. That is why I no longer look into the eyes or   
through the eyes, but by the legerdemain of will swim through the eyes, head and arms and   
legs to explore the curve of vision. I see around myself as the mother who bore me once saw   
round the comers of time. I have broken the wall created by birth and the line of voyage is   
round and unbroken, even as the navel. No form, no image, no architecture, only concentric   
flights of sheer madness. I am the arrow of the dream's substantiality. I verify by flight.   
I nullify by dropping to earth. 
 
Thus moments pass, veridic moments of time without space when I know all, and knowing all I   
collapse beneath the vault of the selfless dream. 
 
Between these moments, in the interstices of the dream, life vainly tried to build up, but   
the scaffold of the city's mad logic is no support. As an individual, as flesh and blood, I   
am levelled down each day to make the fleshless, bloodless dty whose perfection is the sum   
of all logic and death to the dream. I am struggling against an oceanic death in which my   
own death is but a drop of water evaporating. To raise my own individual life but a   
fraction of an inch above this sinking sea of death I must have a faith greater than   
Christ's, a wisdom deeper than that of the greatest seer. I must have the ability and the   
patience to formulate what is not contained in the language of our time, for what is now   
intelligible is meaningless. My eyes are useless, for they render back only the image of   
the known. My whole body must become a constant beam of light, moving with an ever greater   
rapidity, never arrested, never looking back, never dwindling. The dty grows like a cancer;   
I must grow like a sun. The dty eats deeper and deeper into the red; it is an insatiable   
white louse which must die eventually of inanition. I am going to starve the white louse   
which is eating me up. I am going to die as a dty in order to become again a man. Therefore   
I dose my ears, my eyes, my mouth. 
 
Before I shall have become quite a man again I shall probably exist as a park, a sort of   
natural park in which people come to rest, to while away the time. What they say or do will   
be of 
 
112 
 
little matter, for they will bring only their fatigue, their boredom, their hopelessness. I   
shall be a buffer between the white louse and the red corpuscle. I shall be a ventilator   
for removing the poisons accumulated through the effort to perfect that which is   
imperfecdble. I shall be law and order as it exists in nature as it is projected in dream.   
I shall be the wild park in the midst of the nightmare of perfection, the still,   
unshakeable dream in the midst of frenzied activity, the random shot on the white billiard   
table of logic. I shall know neither how to weep nor protest, but I shall be there always   
in absolute silence to receive and to restore. I shall say nothing until the time comes   
 73 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
and I am the answer. 
 
 
 
 
again to be a man. I shall make no effort to preserve, no effort to destroy. I shall make   
no judgments, no criticisms. Those who have had enough will come to me for reflection and   
meditation; those who have not had enough will die as they lived, in disorder, in   
desperation, in ignorance of the truth of redemption. If one says to me, you must be   
religious, I shall make no answer. If one says to me, I have no time now, there's a cunt   
waiting for me, I shall make no answer. Or even if there be a revolution brewing, I shall   
make no answer. There will always be a cunt or a revolution around the comer, but the   
mother who bore me turned many a comer and made no answer, and finally she turned herself   
inside out 
 
Out of such a wild mania for perfection naturally no one would have expected an evolution   
to a wild park, not even I myself, but it is infinitely better, while attending death, to   
live in a state of grace and natural bewilderment. Infinitely better, as life moves towards   
a deathly perfection, to be just a bit of breathing space, a stretch of green, a little   
fresh air, a pool of water. Better also to receive men silently and to enfold them, for   
there is no answer to make them while they are still frantically rushing to turn the   
corner. 
 
I'm thinking now about the rock fight one summer's afternoon long long ago when I was   
staying with my Aunt Caroline up near Hell Gate. My Cousin Gene and I had been corralled by   
a gang of boys while we were playing in the park. We didn't know which side we were   
fighting for but we were fighting in dead earnest amidst the rock pile by the river bank.   
We had to 
 
113 
 
show even more courage than the other boys because we were suspected of being sissies.   
That's how it happened that we killed one of the rival gang. Just as they were charging us   
my cousin Gene let go at the ringleader and caught him in the guts with a handsome-sized   
rock. I let go almost at the same instant and my rock caught him in the temple and when he   
went down he lay there for good and not a peep out of him. A few minutes later the cops   
came and the boy was found dead. He was eight or nine years old, about the same age as us.   
What they would have done to us if they caught us I don't know. Anyway, so as not to arouse   
any suspicion we hurried home: we had cleaned up a bit on the way and had combed our hair.   
We walked in looking almost as immaculate as when we had left the house. Aunt Caroline gave   
us our usual two big slices of sour rye with fresh butter and a little sugar over it and we   
sat there at the kitchen table listening to her with an angelic smile. It was an extremely   
hot day and she thought we had better stay in the house, in the big front room where the   
blinds had been pulled down, and play marbles with our little friend Joey Resselbaum. Joey   
had the reputation of being a little backward and ordinarily we would have trimmed him, but   
that afternoon, by a sort of mute understanding. Gene and I allowed him to win everything   
we had. Joey was so happy that he took us down to his cellar later and made his sister pull   
up her dresses and show us what was underneath. Weesie, they called her, and I remember   
that she was stuck on me instantly. I came from another part of the city, so far away it   
 74 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seemed to them that it was almost like coming from another country. They even seemed to   
think that I talked differently from them. Whereas the other urchins used to pay to make   
Weesie lift her dress up, for us it was done with love. After a while we persuaded her not   
to do it any more for the other boys - we were in love with her and we wanted her to go   
straight. 
 
When I left my cousin at the end of the summer I didn't see him again for twenty years or   
more. When we did meet what deeply impressed me was the look of innocence he wore - the   
same expression as the day of the rock fight. When I spoke to    him    about the fight I was   
still more amazed to discover that he 
 
114 
 
had forgotten that it was we who had lolled the boy: he remembered the boy's death but he   
spoke of it as though neither he nor I had had any part in it. When I mentioned Weesie's   
name he had difficulty in placing her. Don't you remember the cellar next door..    .Joey   
Kesselbaum ? At this a faint smile passed over his face. He thought it extraordinary that I   
should remember such things. He was already married, a father, and working in a factory   
making fancy pipe cases. He considered it extraordinary to remember events that had   
happened so far back in the past. 
 
On leaving him that evening I felt terribly despondent. It was as though he had attempted   
to eradicate a precious part of my life, and himself with it He seemed more attached to the   
tropical fish which he was collecting than to the wonderful past. As for me I recollect   
everything, everything that happened that summer, and particularly the day of the rock   
fight. There are times, in fact, when the taste of that big slice of sour rye which his   
mother handed me that afternoon is stronger in my mouth than the food I am actually   
tasting. And the sight of Weesie's little bud almost stronger than the actual feel of what   
is in my hand. The way the boy lay there, after we downed him, far far more impressive than   
the history of the World War. The whole long summer, in fact, seems like an idyll out of   
the Arthurian legends. I often wonder what it was about this particular summer which makes   
it so vivid in my memory. I have only to close my eyes a moment in order to relive each   
day. The death of the boy certainly caused me no anguish - it was forgotten before a week   
had elapsed. The sight of Weesie standing in the gloom of the cellar with her dress lifted   
up, that too passed easily away. Strangely enough, the thick slice of rye bread which his   
mother handed me each day seems to possess more potency than any other image of that   
period. I wonder about it... wonder deeply. Perhaps it is that whenever she handed me the   
slice of bread it was with a tenderness and a sympathy that I had never known before. She   
was a very homely woman, my Aunt Caroline. Her face was marked by the pox, but it was a   
kind, winsome face which no disfigurement could mar. She was enormously stout and she had a   
very soft, a very caressing voice. When she ad- 
 
115 
 
 
 
 
 75 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
dressed me she seemed to give me even more attention, more consideration, than her own son.   
I would like to have stayed with her always; I would have chosen her for my own mother had   
I been permitted. I remember distinctly how when my mother arrived on a visit she seemed   
peeved that I was so contented with my new life. She even remarked that I was ungrateful, a   
remark I never forgot, because then I realized for the first time that to be ungrateful was   
perhaps necessary and good for one. If I dose my eyes now and I think about it, about the   
slice of bread, I think almost at once that in this house I never knew what it was to be   
scolded. I think if I had told my Aunt Caroline that I had killed a boy in the lot, told   
her just how it happened, she would have put her arm around me and forgiven me - instantly.   
That's why perhaps that summer is so precious to me. It was a summer of tacit and complete   
absolution. That's why I can't forget Weesie either. She was full of a natural goodness, a   
child who was in love with me and who made no reproaches. She was the first of the other   
sex to admire me for being different. After Weesie it was the other way round. I was loved,   
but I was hated too for being what I was. Weesie made an effort to understand. The very   
fact that I came from a strange country, that I spoke another language, drew her closer to   
me. The way her eyes shone when she presented me to her little friends is something I will   
never forget. Her eyes seemed to be bursting with love and admiration. Sometimes the three   
of us would walk to the riverside in the evening and sitting on the bank we would talk as   
children talk when they are out of sight of their elders. We talked then, I know it now so   
well,    more    sanely    and    more    profoundly    than    our    parents.    To    give    us    that    thick    slice    of   
bread each day the parents had to pay a heavy penalty. The worst penalty was that they   
became estranged from us. For, with each slice they fed us we became not only more   
indifferent to them, but we became more and more superior to them. In our ungratefulness   
was our strength and our beauty. Not being devoted we were innocent of all crime. The boy   
whom I saw drop dead, who lay there motionless, without making the slightest sound or   
whimper, the killing of that boy seems almost like a clean, healthy performance. The 
 
116 
 
struggle for food, on the other hand, seems foul and degrading and when we stood in the   
presence of our parents we sensed that they had come to us unclean and for that we could   
never forgive them. The thick slice of bread in the afternoons, precisely because it was   
not earned, tasted delicious to us. Never again will bread taste this way. Never again will   
it be given this way. The day of the murder it was even tastier than ever. It had a slight   
taste of terror in it which has been lacking ever since. And it was received with Aunt   
Caroline's tacit but complete absolution. 
 
There    is    something    about    the    rye    bread    which    I    am    trying    to    fathom    -    something    vaguely   
delicious, terrifying and liberating, something associated with first discoveries. I am   
thinking of another slice of sour rye which was connected with a still earlier period, when   
my little friend Stanley and I used to rifle the icebox. That was    stolen    bread and   
consequently even more marvellous to the palate than the bread which was given with love.   
But it was in the act of eating the rye bread, the walking around with it and talking at   
the same time, that something in the nature of revelation occurred. It was like a state of   
 76 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grace, a state of complete ignorance, of self-abnegation. Whatever was imparted to me in   
these moments I seem to have retained intact and there is no fear that I shall ever lose   
the knowledge that was gained. It was just the fact perhaps that it was no knowledge as we   
ordinarily think of it. It was almost like receiving a truth, though truth is almost too   
precise    a    word    for    it.    The    important    thing    about    the    sour    rye    discussions    is    that    they   
always took place away from home, away from the eyes of our parents whom we feared but   
never respected. Left to ourselves there were no limits to what we might imagine. Facts had   
little importance for us: what we demanded of a subject was that it allow us opportunity to   
expand. What amazes me, when I look back on it, is how well we understood one another, how   
well we penetrated to the essential character of each and every one, young or old. At seven   
years of age we knew with dead certainty, for example, that such a fellow would end up in   
prison, that another would be a drudge, and another a good for nothing, and so on. We were   
absolutely correct in our diagnoses, much 
 
117 
 
more correct, for example, than our parents, or our teachers, more correct, indeed, than   
the so-called psychologists. Alfie Betcha turned out to be an absolute bum: Johnny Gerhardt   
went to the penitentiary: Bob Kunst became a work horse. Infallible predictions. The   
learning we received only tended to obscure our vision. From the day we went to school we   
learned nothing: on the contrary, we were made obtuse, we were wrapped in a fog of words   
and abstractions. 
 
With the sour rye the world was what it is essentially, a primitive world ruled by magic, a   
world in which fear played the most important role. The boy who could inspire the most fear   
was the leader and he was respected as long as he could maintain his power. There were   
other boys who were rebels, and they were admired, but they never became the leader. The   
majority were clay in the hands of the fearless ones: a few could be depended on, but the   
most    not.    The    air    was    full    of    tension    -nothing    could    be    predicted    for    the    morrow.    This   
loose, primitive nucleus of a society created sharp appetites, sharp emotions, sharp   
curiosity.    Nothing    was    taken    for    granted:    each    day    demanded    a    new    test    of    power,    a    new   
sense of strength or of failure. And so, up until the age of nine or ten, we had a real   
taste of life - we were on our own. That is, those of us who were fortunate enough not to   
have been spoiled by our parents, those of us who were free to roam the streets at night   
and to discover things with our own eyes. 
 
What I am thinking of, with a certain amount of regret and longing, is that this thoroughly   
restricted life of early boyhood seems like a limitless universe and the life which   
followed upon it, the life of the adult, a constantly diminishing realm. From the moment   
when one is put in school one is lost: one has the feeling of having a halter put around   
his neck. The taste goes out of the bread as it goes out of life. Getting the bread becomes   
more important than the eating of it Everything is calculated and everything has a price   
upon it. 
 
 
 
 77 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
My cousin Gene became an absolute nonentity: Stanley became a first-rate failure. Besides   
these two boys, for whom I had the greatest affection, there was another, Joey, who has   
since become a letter carrier. I could weep when I think of what life 
 
118 
 
has made them. As boys they were perfect, Stanley least of all because Stanley was more   
temperamental. Stanley went into violent rages now and then and there was no telling how   
you stood with him from day to day. But Joey and Gene were the essence of goodness: they   
were friends in the old meaning of the word. I think of Joey often when I go out into the   
country because he was what is called a country boy. That meant, for one thing, that he was   
more loyal, more sincere, more tender, than the boys we knew. I can see Joey now coming to   
meet me: 
 
he was always running with arms wide open and ready to embrace me, always breathless with   
adventures that he was planning for my participation, always loaded with gifts which he had   
saved for my coming. Joey received me like the monarchs of old received their guests.   
Everything I looked at was mine. We had innumerable things to tell each other and nothing   
was dull or boring. The difference between our respective worlds was enormous. Though I was   
of the city too, still, when I visited my cousin Gene, I became aware of an even greater   
city, a city of New York proper in which my sophistication was negligible. Stanley knew no   
excursions from his own neighbourhood, but Stanley had come from a strange land over the   
sea, Poland, and there was always between us the mark of the voyage. The fact that he spoke   
another tongue also increased our admiration for him. Each one was surrounded by a   
distinguishing aura, by a well-defined identity which was preserved inviolate. With the   
entrance    into    life    these    traits    of    difference    fell    away    and    we    all    became    more    or    less   
alike and, of course, most unlike our own selves. And it is this loss of the peculiar self,   
of the perhaps unimportant individuality, which saddens me and makes the rye bread stand   
out glowingly. The wonderful sour rye went into the making of our individual selves: it was   
like the communion loaf in which all participate but from which each one receives only   
according to his peculiar state of grace. Now we are eating of the same bread, but without   
benefit of communion, without grace. We are eating to fill our bellies and our hearts are   
cold and empty. We are separate but not individual. There was another thing about the sour   
rye and that was that 
 
119 
 
we often ate a raw onion with it. I remember standing with Stanley in the late afternoons,   
a sandwich in hand, in front of the veterinary's which was just opposite my home. It always   
seemed to be late afternoon when Dr. M cKinney elected to castrate a stallion, an operation   
which was done in public and which always gathered a small crowd. I remember the smell of   
the hot iron and the quiver of the horse's legs. Dr. M cKinney's goatee, the taste of the   
raw onion and the smell of the sewer gas just behind us where they were laying in a new gas   
main. It was an olfactory performance through and through and, as Abelard so well describes   
 
 
 78 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
it, practically painless. Not knowing the reason for the operation we used to hold long   
discussions afterwards which usually ended in a brawl. Nobody liked Dr. M cKinney either:   
there was a smell of iodoform about him and of stale horse piss. Sometimes the gutter in   
front of his own office was filled with blood and in the winter time the blood froze into   
the ice and gave a strange look to his sidewalk. Now and then the big two-wheeled cart   
came, an open cart which smelled like the devil, and they whisked a dead horse into it.   
Rather it was hoisted in, the carcass, by a long chain which made a creaking noise like the   
dropping of an anchor. The smell of a bloated dead horse is a foul smell and our street was   
full of foul smells. On the comer was Paul Sauer's place where raw hides and trimmed hides   
were stacked up in the street: they stank frightfully too. And then the acrid odour coming   
from the tin factory behind the house - like the smell of modem progress. The smell of a   
dead horse, which is almost unbearable, is still a thousand times better than the smell of   
burning chemicals. And the sight of a dead horse with a bullet hole in the temple, his head   
lying    in    a    pool    of    blood    and    his    asshole    bursting    with    the    last    spasmic    evacuation,    is   
still a better sight than that of a group of men in blue aprons coming out of the arched   
doorway of the tin factory with a hand-truck loaded with bales of fresh-made tin.   
Fortunately for us there was a bakery opposite the tin factory and from the back door of   
the bakery, which was only a grill, we could watch the bakers at work and get the sweet,   
irresistible odour of bread and cake. And if, as I say, the gas mains were being laid there   
was another 
 
120 
 
strange medley of smells - the smell of earth just turned up, of rotted iron pipes, of   
sewer gas, and of the onion sandwiches which the Italian labourers ate whilst reclining   
against the mounds of upturned earth. There were other smells too, of course, but less   
striking: such, for instance, as the smell of Silverstein's tailor shop where there was   
always a great deal of pressing going on. This was a hot, fetid stench which can be best   
apprehended by imagining that Silverstein, who was a lean, smelly Jew himself, was cleaning   
out the farts which his customers had left behind in their pants. Next door was the candy   
and stationery shop owned by two daffy old maids who were religious: here there was the   
almost sickeningly sweet smell of taffy, of Spanish peanuts, of jujubes and Sen-Sen and of   
Sweet Caporal cigarettes. The stationery store was like a beautiful cave, always cool,   
always full of intriguing objects: where the soda fountain was, which gave off another   
distinct odour, ran a thick marble slab which turned sour in the summer time and yet   
mingled pleasantly, the sourness, with the slightly ticklish, dry smell of the carbonated   
water when it was fizzed into the glass of ice cream. 
 
With the refinements that come with maturity the smells faded out, to be replaced by only   
one other distinctly memorable, distinctly pleasurable smell - the odour of cunt. More   
particularly the odour that lingers on the fingers after playing with a woman, for, if it   
has not been noticed before, this smell is even more enjoyable, perhaps because it already   
carried with it the perfume of the past tense, than the odour of the cunt itself. But this   
odour, which belongs to maturity, is but a faint odour compared with the odours attaching   
 79 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to childhood. It is an odour which evaporates, almost as quickly in the mind's imagination,   
as in reality. One can remember many things about the woman one has loved but it is hard to   
remember the smell of her cunt - with anything like certitude. The smell of wet hair, on   
the other hand, a woman's wet hair, is much more powerful and lasting - why, I don't know.   
I can remember even now, after almost forty years, the smell of my Aunt Tillie's hair after   
she had taken a shampoo. This shampoo was performed in the kitchen which was always   
overheated. Usually it was a 
 
121 
 
late Saturday afternoon, in preparation for a ball which meant again another singular thing   
- that there would appear a cavalry sergeant with very beautiful yellow stripes, a   
singularly handsome sergeant who even to my eyes was far too gracious, manly and   
intelligent for an imbecile such as my Aunt Tulle. But anyway, there she sat on a little   
stool by the kitchen table drying her hair with a towel. Beside her was a little lamp with   
a smoked chimney and beside the lamp two curling irons the very sight of which filled me   
with an inexplicable loathing. Generally she had a little mirror propped up on the table: I   
can see her now making wry faces at herself as she squeezed the blackheads out of her nose.   
She was a stringy, ugly, imbecilic creature with two enormous buck teeth which gave her a   
horsey look whenever her lips drew back in a smile. She smelled sweaty, too, even after a   
bath. But the smell of her hair - that smell I can never forget, because somehow the smell   
is associated with my hatred and contempt for her. This smell, when the hair was just   
drying, was like the smell that comes up from the bottom of a marsh. There were two smells   
- one of the wet hair and another of the same hair when she threw it into the stove and it   
burst into flame. There were always curled knots of hair which came from her comb, and they   
were mixed with dandruff and the sweat of her scalp which was greasy and dirty. I used to   
stand by her side and watch her, wondering what the ball would be like and wondering how   
she would behave at the ball. When she was all primped up she would ask me if she didn't   
look beautiful and if I didn't love her, and of course I would tell her yes. But in the   
water closet later, which was in the hall just next to the kitchen, I would sit in the   
flickering light of the burning taper which was placed on the window ledge, and I would say   
to myself that she looked crazy. After she was gone I would pick up the curling irons and   
smell them and squeeze them. They were revolting and fascinating - like spiders. Everything   
about this kitchen was fascinating to me. Familiar as I was with it I never conquered it.   
It was at once so public and so intimate. Here I was given my bath, in the big tin tub, on   
Saturdays. Here the three sisters washed themselves and primped themselves. Here my   
grandfather stood at the sink and washed him- 
 
122 
 
self to the waist and later handed me his shoes to be shined. Here I stood at the window in   
the winter time and watched the snow fall, watched it dully, vacantly, as if I were in the   
womb and listening to the water running while my mother sat on the toilet. It was in the   
kitchen where the secret confabulations were held, frightening, odious sessions from which   
 80 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they always reappeared with long, grave faces or eyes red with weeping. Why they ran to the   
kitchen I don't know. But it was often while they stood thus in secret conference, haggling   
about a will or deciding how to dispense with some poor relative, that the door was   
suddenly opened and a visitor would arrive, whereupon the atmosphere immediately changed.   
Changed violently, I mean, as though they were relieved that some outside force had   
intervened to spare them the horrors of a protracted secret session. I remember now that,   
seeing that door open and the face of an unexpected visitor peering in, my heart would leap   
with joy. Soon I would be given a big glass pitcher and asked to run to the comer saloon   
where I would hand the pitcher in, through the little window at the family entrance, and   
wait until it was returned brimming with foamy suds. This little run to the comer for a   
pitcher of beer was an expedition of absolutely incalculable proportions. First of all   
there was the barber shop just below us, where Stanley's father practised his profession.   
Time and again, just as I was dashing out for something, I would see the father giving   
Stanley a drubbing with the razor strop, a sight that made my blood boil. Stanley was my   
best friend and his father was nothing but a drunken Polak. One evening, however, as I was   
dashing out with the pitcher, I had the intense pleasure of seeing another Polak go for   
Stanley's old man with a razor. I saw his old man coming through the door backwards, the   
blood running down his neck, his face white as a sheet He fell on the sidewalk in front of   
the shop, twitching and moaning, and I remember looking at him for a minute or two and   
walking on feeling absolutely contented and happy about it. Stanley had sneaked out during   
the scrimmage and was accompanying me to the saloon door. He was glad too, though he was a   
bit frightened. When we got back the ambulance was there in front of the door and they 
 
123 
 
were lifting him on the stretcher, his face and neck covered with a sheet. Sometimes it   
happened that Father Carroll's pet choir boy strolled by the house just as I was hitting   
the air. This was an event of primary importance. The boy was older than any of us and he   
was a sissy, a fairy in the making. His very walk used to enrage us. As soon as he was   
spotted the news went out in every direction and before he had reached the corner he was   
surrounded by a gang of boys all much smaller than himself who taunted him and mimicked him   
until he burst into tears. Then we would pounce on him, like a pack of wolves, pull him to   
the ground and tear the clothes off his back. It was a disgraceful performance but it made   
us feel good. Nobody knew yet what a fairy was, but whatever it was we were against it. In   
the same way we were against the Chinamen. There was one Chinaman, from the laundry up the   
street, who used to pass frequently and, like the sissy from Father Carroll's church, he   
too had to run the gauntlet. He looked exactly like the picture of a coolie which one sees   
in the school books. He wore a sort of black alpaca coat with braided button holes,   
slippers without heels, and a pig tail. Usually he walked with his hands in his sleeves. It   
was his walk which I remember best, a sort of sly, mincing, feminine walk which was utterly   
foreign and menacing to us. We were in mortal dread of him and we hated him because he was   
absolutely indifferent to our gibes. We thought he was too ignorant to notice our insults.   
Then one day when we entered the laundry he gave us a little surprise. First he handed us   
the package of laundry: then he reached down below the counter and gathered a handful of   
 81 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lichee nuts from the big bag. He was smiling as he came from behind the counter to open the   
door. He was still smiling as he caught hold of Alfie Betcha and pulled his ears: he caught   
hold of each of us in turn and pulled our ears, still smiling. Then he made a ferocious   
grimace and, swift as a cat, he ran behind the counter and picked up a long, ugly-looking   
knife which he brandished at us. We fell over ourselves getting out of the place. When we   
got to the comer and looked around we saw him standing in the doorway with an iron in his   
hand looking very calm and peaceful. After this incident nobody 
 
124 
 
would go to the laundry any more: we had to pay little Louis Pirossa a nickel each week to   
collect the laundry for us. Louis's father owned the fruit stand on the comer. He used to   
hand us the rotten bananas as a token of his affection. Stanley was especially fond of the   
rotten bananas as his aunt used to fry them for him. The fried bananas were considered a   
delicacy in Stanley's home. Once, on his birthday, there was a party given for Stanley and   
the whole neighbourhood was invited. Everything went beautifully until it came to the fried   
bananas. Somehow nobody wanted to touch the bananas, as this was a dish known only to   
Polaks like Stanley's parents. It was considered disgusting to eat fried bananas. In the   
midst of the embarrassment some bright youngster suggested that crazy Willie Maine should   
be given the fried bananas. Willie Maine was older than any of us but unable to talk. He   
said nothing but Bjark I Bjork! He said this to everything. So when the bananas were passed   
to him he said    Bjork!    and he reached for them with two hands. But his brother George was   
there and George felt insulted that they should have palmed off the rotten bananas on his   
crazy brother. So George started a fight and Willie, seeing his brother attacked, began to   
fight also, screaming    Bjork! Bjork I    Not only did he strike out at the other boys but at   
the girls too, which created a pandemonium. Finally Stanley's old man, hearing the noise,   
came up from the barber shop with a strop in his hand. He took crazy Willie Maine by the   
scruff of the neck and began to lambast him. M eanwhile his brother George had sneaked off   
to call Mr. M aine senior. The latter, who was also a bit of a drunkard, arrived in his   
shirt sleeves and seeing poor Willie being beaten by the drunken barber, he went for him   
with two stout fists and beat him unmercifully. Willie, who had gotten free meanwhile, was   
on his hands and knees, gobbling up the fried bananas which had fallen on the floor. He was   
stuffing them away like a nannygoat, fast as he could find them. When the old man saw him   
there chewing away like a goat he became furious and picking up the strop he went after   
Willie with a vengeance. Now Willie began to howl - Bjork! Bjark I - and suddenly everybody   
began to laugh. That took the steam out of 
 
125 
 
Mr. Maine and he relented. Finally he sat down and Stanley's aunt brought him a glass of   
wine. Hearing the racket some of the other neighbours came in and there was more wine and   
then beer and then schnapps and soon everybody was happy and singing and whistling and even   
the kids got drunk and then crazy Willie got drunk and again he got down on the floor like   
a nannygoat and he yelled    Bjork! Bjork!    and Alfie Betcha, who was very drunk though only   
 82 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eight years old, bit crazy Willie Maine in the backside and then Willie bit him and then we   
all started biting each other and the parents stood by laughing and screaming with glee and   
it was very very merry and there were more fried bananas and everybody  ate them this time   
and then there were speeches and more bumpers downed and crazy Willie Maine tried to sing   
for us but he could only sing    Bjork! Bjark!    It was a stupendous success, the birthday   
party, and for a week or more no one talked of anything but the party and what good Polaks   
Stanley's people were. The fried bananas, too, were a success and for a time it was hard to   
get any rotten bananas from Louis Pirossa's old man because they were so much in demand.   
And then an event occurred which cast a pall over the entire neighbourhood - the defeat of   
Joe Gerhardt at the hands of Joey Silverstein. The latter was the tailor's son: he was a   
lad of fifteen or sixteen, rather quiet and studious looking, who was shunned by the other   
older boys because he was a Jew. One day as he was delivering a pair of pants on Fillmore   
Place he was accosted by Joe Gerhardt who was about the same age and who considered himself   
a rather superior being. There was an exchange of words and then Joe Gerhardt pulled the   
pants away from the Silverstein boy and threw them in the gutter. Nobody had ever imagined   
that young Silverstein would reply to such an insult by recourse to his fists and so when   
he struck out at Joe Gerhardt and cracked him square in the jaw everybody was taken aback,   
most of all Joe Gerhardt himself. There was a fight which lasted about twenty minutes and   
at the end Joe Gerhardt lay on the sidewalk unable to get up. Whereupon the Silverstein boy   
gathered up the pair of pants and walked quietly and proudly back to his father's shop.   
Nobody said a 
 
126 
 
word to him. The affair was regarded as a calamity. Who had ever heard of a Jew beating up   
a Gentile? It was something inconceivable, and yet it had happened, right before everyone's   
eyes. Night after night, sitting on the curb as we used to, the situation was discussed   
from every angle, but without any solution until... well until Joe Gerhardt's younger   
brother, Johnny, became so wrought up about it that he decided to settle the matter   
himself. Johnny, though younger and smaller than his brother, was as tough and invincible   
as a young puma. He was typical of the shanty Irish who made up the neighbourhood. His idea   
of getting even with young Silverstein was to lie in wait for him one evening as the latter   
was stepping out of the store and trip him up. When he tripped him up that evening he had   
provided himself in advance with two little rocks which he concealed in his fists and when   
poor Silverstein went down he pounced on him and then with the two handsome little rocks he   
pounded poor Silverstein's temples. To his amazement Silverstein offered no resistance:   
even when he got up and gave him a chance to get on his feet Silverstein never so much as   
budged. Then Johnny got frightened and ran away. He must have been thoroughly frightened   
because he never came back again: the next that was heard of him was that he had been   
picked, up out West somewhere and sent to a reformatory. His mother, who was a slatternly,   
jolly Irish bitch, said that it served him right and she hoped to God she'd never lay eyes   
on him again. When the boy Silverstein recovered he was not the same any more: people said   
the beating had affected his brain, that he was a little daffy. Joe Gerhardt, on the other   
hand, rose to prominence again. It seems that he had gone to see the Silverstein boy while   
 83 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he lay in bed and had made a deep apology to him. This again was something that had never   
been heard of before. It was something so strange, so unusual, that Joe Gerhardt was looked   
upon    almost    as    a    knight    errant.    Nobody    had    approved    of    the    way    Johnny    behaved,    and    yet   
nobody would have thought of going to young Silverstein and apologizing to him. That was an   
act of such delicacy, such elegance, that Joe Gerhardt was looked upon as a real gentleman   
- the first and only gentleman in the neighbourhood. It  
 
127 
 
was a word that had never been used among us and now it was on everybody's lips and it was   
considered a distinction to be a gentleman. This sudden transformation of the defeated Joe   
Gerhardt into a gentleman I remember made a deep impression upon me. A few years later,   
when I moved into another neighbourhood and encountered Claude de Lorraine, a French boy, I   
was prepared to understand and accept "a gentleman". This Claude was a boy such as I had   
never laid eyes on before. In the old neighbourhood he would have been regarded as a sissy:   
for one thing he spoke too well, too correctly, too politely, and for another thing he was   
too considerate, too gentle, too gallant. And then, while playing with him, to hear him   
suddenly break into French as his mother or father came along, provided us with something   
like a shock. German we had heard and German was a permissible transgression, but French!   
Why to talk French, or even to understand it, was to be thoroughly alien, thoroughly   
aristocratic, rotten, distingue. And yet Claude was one of us, as good as us in every way,   
even a little bit better, we had to admit secretly. But there was a blemish - his French!   
It antagonized us. He had no right to be living in our neighbourhood, no right to be as   
capable and manly as he was. Often, when his mother called him in and we had said good-bye   
to him, we got together in the lot and we discussed the Lorraine family backwards and   
forwards. We wondered what they ate, for example, because being French they must have   
different customs than ours. No one had ever set foot in Claude de Lorraine's home either -   
that was another suspicious and repugnant fact. Why? What were they concealing? Yet when   
they passed us in the street they were always very cordial, always smiled, always spoke in   
English and a most excellent English it was. They used to make us feel rather ashamed of   
ourselves - they were superior, that's what it was. And there was still another baffling   
thing - with the other boys a direct question brought a direct answer, but with Claude de   
Lorraine there was never any direct answer. He always smiled very charmingly before   
replying and he was very cool, collected, employing an irony and a mockery which was beyond   
us. He was a thorn in our side, Claude de Lorraine, and when finally  
 
128 
 
he moved out of the neighbourhood we all breathed a sigh of relief. As for myself, it was   
only maybe ten or fifteen years later that I thought about this boy and his strange elegant   
behaviour. And it was then that I felt I had made a bad blunder. For suddenly one day it   
occurred to me that Claude de Lorraine had come up to me on a certain occasion obviously to   
win my friendship and I had treated him rather cavalierly. At the time I thought of this   
incident it suddenly dawned on me that Claude de Lorraine must have seen something   
 84 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different in me and that he had meant to honour me by extending the hand of friendship. But   
back in those days I bad a code of honour, such as it was, and that was to run with the   
herd. Had I become a bosom friend of Claude de Lorraine I would have been betraying the   
other boys. No matter what advantages lay in the wake of such a friendship they were not   
for me, I was one of the gang and it was my duty to remain aloof from such as Claude de   
Lorraine. I remembered this incident once again, I must say, after a still greater interval   
- after I had been in France a few months and the word "raisomiable" had come to acquire a   
wholly new significance for me. Suddenly one day, overhearing, I thought of Claude de   
Lorraine's overtures on the street in front of his house. I recalled vividly that he had   
used    the    word    reasonable.    He had probably asked me to be    reasonable,    a word which then   
would never have crossed my lips as there was no need for it in my vocabulary. It was a   
word, like gentleman, which was rarely brought out and then only with great discretion and   
circumspection. It was a word which might cause others to laugh at you. There were lots of   
words like that - really, for example. No one I knew had ever used the word really - until   
Jack Lawson came along. He used it because his parents were English and, though we made fun   
of him, we forgave him for it.    Really    was a word which reminded me immediately of little   
Carl Ragner from the old neighbourhood. Carl Ragner was the only son of a politician who   
lived on the rather distinguished little street called Fillmore Place. He lived near the   
end of the street in a little red brick house which was always beautifully kept. I remember   
the house because passing it on my way to school I used to remark how 
 
129 
 
beautifully the brass knobs on the door were polished. In fact, nobody else had brass knobs   
on their doors. Anyway, little Carl Ragner was one of those boys who was not allowed to   
associate with other boys. He was rarely seen, as a matter of fact. Usually it was a Sunday   
that we caught a glimpse of him walking with his father. Had his father not been a powerful   
figure in the neighbourhood Carl would have been stoned to death. He was really impossible,   
in his Sunday garb. Not only did he wear long pants and patent leather shoes, but he   
sported a derby and a cane. At six years of age a boy who would allow himself to be dressed   
up in this fashion must be a ninny - that was the consensus of opinion. Some said he was   
sickly, as though that were an excuse for his eccentric dress. The strange thing is that I   
never once heard him speak. He was so elegant, so refined, that perhaps he had imagined it   
was    bad manners    to speak    in public.    At any    rate, I    used to    lie in    wait for    him Sunday   
mornings just to see him pass with his old man. I watched him with the same avid curiosity   
that I would watch the firemen cleaning the engines in the fire house. Sometimes on the way   
home he would be carrying a little box of ice cream, the smallest size they had, probably   
just enough for him, for his dessert. Dessert was another word which had somehow become   
familiar to us and which we used derogatorily when referring to the likes of little Carl   
Ragner and his family. We could spend hours wondering what these people ate for    dessert,   
our pleasure consisting principally in bandying about this new-found word,    dessert,    which   
had probably been smuggled out of the Ragner household. It must also have been about this   
time that Santos Dumont came into fame. For us there was something grotesque about the name   
Santos Dumont. About his exploits we were not much concerned - just the name. For most of   
 85 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
us it smelled of sugar, of Cuban plantations, of the strange Cuban flag which had a star in   
the comer and which was always highly regarded by those who saved the little cards which   
were given away with Sweet Caporal cigarettes and on which there were represented either   
the flags of the different nations or the leading soubrettes of the stage or the famous   
pugilists. Santos Dumont, then, was something delightfully foreign, in contradistinction to   
the usual 
 
130 
 
foreign person or object, such as the Chinese laundry, or Claude de Lorraine's haughty   
French family. Santos Dumont was a magical word which suggested a beautiful flowing   
moustache,    a    sombrero,    spurs,    something    airy,    delicate,    humorous,    quixotic.    Sometimes    it   
brought up the aroma of coffee beans and of straw mats, or, because it was so thoroughly   
outlandish and quixotic, it would entail a digression concerning the life of the   
Hottentots. For there were among us older boys who were beginning to read and who would   
entertain us by the hour with fantastic tales which they had gleaned from books such as   
Ayesha    or Ouida's    Under Two Flags.    The real flavour of knowledge is most definitely   
associated in my mind with the vacant lot at the comer of the new neighbourhood where I was   
transplanted at about the age often. Here, when the fall days came on and we stood about   
the bonfire roasting chippies and raw potatoes in the little cans which we carried, there   
ensued a new type of discussion which differed from the old discussions I had known in that   
the origins were always bookish. Some one had just read a book of adventure, or a book of   
science, and forthwith the whole street became animated by the introduction of a hitherto   
unknown subject. It might be that one of these-boys had just discovered that there was such   
a thing as the Japanese current and he would try to explain to us how the Japanese current   
came into existence and what the purpose of it was. This was the only way we learned things   
- against the fence, as it were, while roasting chippies and raw potatoes. These bits of   
knowledge sunk deep - so deep, in fact, that later, confronted with a more accurate   
knowledge it was often difficult to dislodge the older knowledge. In this way it was   
explained to us one day by an older boy that the Egyptians had known about the circulation   
of the blood, something which seemed so natural to us that it was hard later to swallow the   
story of the discovery of the circulation of the blood by an Englishman named Harvey. Nor   
does it seem strange to me now that in those days most of our conversation was about remote   
places, such as China, Peru, Egypt, Africa, Iceland, Greenland. We talked about ghosts,   
about God, about the transmigration of souls, about Hell, about astronomy, about strange   
birds and fish, about the 
 
131 
 
formation of precious stone, about rubber plantations, about methods of torture, about the   
Aztecs and the Incas, about marine life, about volcanoes and earthquakes, about burial   
rites and wedding ceremonies in various parts of the earth, about languages, about the   
origin of the American Indian, about the buffaloes dying out, about strange diseases, about   
cannibalism, about wizardry, about trips to the moon and what it was like there, about   
 86 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
murderers and highwaymen, about the miracles in the Bible, about the manufacture of   
pottery, about a thousand and one subjects which were never mentioned at home or in school   
and which were vital to us because we were starved and the world was full of wonder and   
mystery and it was only when we stood shivering in the vacant lot that we got to talking   
seriously and felt a need for communication which was at once pleasurable and terrifying. 
 
The wonder and the mystery of life - which is throttled in us as we become responsible   
members of society! Until we were pushed out to work the world was very small and we were   
living on the fringe of it, on the frontier, as it were, of the unknown. A small Greek   
world which was nevertheless deep enough to provide all manner of variation, all manner of   
adventure and speculation. Not so very small either, since it held in reserve the most   
boundless potentialities. I have gained nothing by the enlargement of my world: on the   
contrary, I have lost. I want to become more and more childish and to pass beyond childhood   
in the opposite direction. I want to go exactly contrary to the normal line of development,   
pass into a super-infantile realm of being which will be absolutely crazy and chaotic but   
not crazy and chaotic as the world about me. I have been an adult and a father and a   
responsible member of society. I have earned my daily bread. I have adapted myself to a   
world which never was mine. I want to break through this enlarged world and stand again on   
the frontier of an unknown world which will throw this pale, unilateral world into shadow.   
I want to pass beyond the responsibility of fatherhood to the irresponsibility of the   
anarchic man who cannot be coerced nor wheedled nor cajoled nor bribed nor traduced. I want   
to take as my guide Oberon the night-rider who, under the spread of 
 
132 
 
his black wings, eliminates both the beauty and the horror of the past: I want to flee   
towards a perpetual dawn with a swiftness and relentlessness that leaves no room for   
remorse, regret, or repentance. I want to outstrip the inventive man who is a curse to an   
earth in order to stand once again before an impassable deep which not even the strongest   
wings will enable me to traverse. Even if I must become a wild and natural park inhabited   
only by idle dreamers I must not stop to rest here in the ordered fatuity of responsible,   
adult life. I must do this in remembrance of a life beyond all comparison with the life   
which was promised me, in remembrance of the life of a child who was strangled and stifled   
by the mutual consent of those who had surrendered. Everything which the fathers and the   
mothers created I disown. I am going back to a world even smaller than the old Hellenic   
world, going back to a world which I can always touch with outstretched arms, the world of   
what I know and see and recognize from moment to moment. Any other world is meaningless to   
me, and alien and hostile. In retraversing the first bright world which I knew as a child I   
wish not to rest there but to muscle back to a still brighter world from which I must have   
escaped. What this world is like I do not know, nor am I even sure that I will find it, but   
it is my world and nothing else intrigues me. 
 
The first glimpse, the first realization, of the bright new world came through my meeting   
Roy Hamilton. I was in my twenty-first year, probably the worst year of my whole life. I   
 87 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was in such a state of despair that I had decided to leave home but thought and spoke only   
of the California where I had planned to go to start a new life. So violently did I dream   
of this new promised land that later, when I had returned from California, I scarcely   
remembered the California I had seen but thought and spoke only of the California, which I   
had known in my dreams. It was just prior to my leave-taking that I met Hamilton. He was a   
dubious half-brother to my old friend MacGregor: they had only recently made each other's   
acquaintance,    as    Roy,    who    had    lived    most    of    his    life    in    California,    had    been    under    the   
impression    all    along    that    his    real    father    was    M r.    Hamilton    and    not    Mr.    M acGregor.    As    a   
matter 
 
133 
 
of fact it was in order to disentangle the mystery surrounding his parentage that he had   
come East. Living with the MacGregors had apparently brought him no nearer to a solution of   
the mystery. Indeed he seemed to be more perplexed than ever after getting acquainted with   
the man whom he had concluded must be his legitimate father. He was perplexed, as he later   
admitted to me, because in neither man could he find any resemblance to the man he   
considered himself to be. It was probably this harassing problem of deciding whom to take   
for a father which had stimulated the development of his own character. I say this, because   
immediately upon being introduced to him, I felt that I was in the presence of a being such   
as I had never known before. I had prepared, through MacGregor's description of him, to   
meet a rather "strange" individual, "strange" in MacGregor's mouth meaning slightly   
cracked. He was indeed strange, but so sharply sane that I at once felt exalted. For the   
first time I was talking to a man who got behind the meaning of words and went to the very   
essence of things. I felt that I was talking to a philosopher, not a philosopher such as I   
had encountered through books, but a man who philosophized constantly - and who lived this   
philosophy which he expounded. That is to say, he had no theory at all, except to penetrate   
to the very essence of things and, in the light of each fresh revelation to so live his   
life that there would be a minimum of discord between the truths which were revealed to him   
and the exemplification of these truths in action. Naturally his behaviour was strange to   
those about him. It had not, however, been strange to those who knew him out on the Coast   
where, as he said, he was in his own element. There apparently he was regarded as a   
superior being and was listened to with the utmost respect, even with awe. 
 
I came upon him in the midst of a struggle which I only appreciated many years later. At   
the time I couldn't see the importance which he attached to finding his real father: in   
fact, I used to joke about it because the role of the father meant little to me, or the   
role of the mother, for that matter. In Roy Hamilton I saw the ironic struggle of a man who   
had already emancipated himself and yet was seeking to establish a solid 
 
134 
 
biological link for which he had absolutely no need. This conflict over the real father   
had, paradoxically, made him a superfather. He was a teacher and an exemplar: he had only   
 
 
 88 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to open his mouth for me to realize that I was listening to a wisdom which was utterly   
different from anything which I had heretofore associated with that word. It would be easy   
to dismiss him as a mystic, for a mystic he undoubtedly was, but he was the first mystic I   
had ever encountered who also knew how to keep his feet on the ground. He was a mystic who   
knew how to invent practical things, among them a drill such as was badly needed for the   
oil industry and from which he later made a fortune. Because of his strange metaphysical   
talk, however, nobody at the time gave much heed to his very practical invention. It was   
regarded as another one of his cracked ideas. 
 
He was continually talking about himself and his relation to the world about, a quality   
which created the unfortunate impression that he was simply a blatant egotist. It was even   
said, which was true enough as far as it went, that he seemed more concerned about the   
truth of Mr. M acGregor's fatherhood than about Mr. M acGregor, the father. The implication   
was that he had no real love for his new-found father but was simply deriving a strong   
personal gratification from the truth of the discovery, that he was exploiting this   
discovery in his usual self-aggrandizing way. It was deeply true, of course, because M r.   
MacGregor in the flesh was infinitely less than Mr. M acGregor as symbol of the lost father.   
But the MacGregors knew nothing about symbols and would never have understood even had it   
been explained to them. They were making a contradictory effort to at once embrace the long   
lost son and at the same time reduce him to an understandable level on which they could   
seize him not as the "long lost" but simply as the son. Whereas it was obvious to any one   
with the least intelligence that his son was not a son at all but a sort of spiritual   
father, a sort of Christ, I might say, who was making a most valiant effort to accep t as   
blood and flesh what he had already all too clearly freed himself from. 
 
I was surprised and flattered, therefore, that this strange individual whom I looked upon   
with the warmest admiration 
 
135 
 
should elect to make me his confident. By comparison I was very bookish, intellectual, and   
worldly in a wrong way. But almost immediately I discarded this side of my nature and   
allowed myself to bask in the warm, immediate light which is profound and natural intuition   
of things created. To come into his presence gave me the sensation of being undressed, or   
rather peeled, for it was much more than mere nakedness which he demanded of the person he   
was talking to. In talking to me he addressed himself to a me whose existence I had only   
dimly suspected, the me, for example, which emerged when, suddenly, reading a book I   
realized that I had been dreaming. Few books had this faculty of putting me into a trance,   
this trance of utter lucidity in which, unknown to oneself, one makes the deepest   
resolutions. Roy Hamilton's conversation partook of this quality. It made me more than ev er   
alert, preternaturally alert, without at the same time crumbling the fabric of dream. He   
was appealing, in other words, to the germ of the self, to the being who would eventually   
outgrow the naked personality, the synthetic individuality, and leave me truly alone and   
solitary in order to work out my own proper destiny. 
 
 89 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our talk was like a secret language in the midst of which the others went to sleep or faded   
away like ghosts. For my friend MacGregor it was baffling and irritating: he knew me more   
intimately than any of the other fellows but he had never found anything in me to   
correspond to the character which I now presented him with. He spoke of Roy Hamilton as a   
bad influence, which again was deeply true since this unexpected meeting with his half- 
brother served more than anything else to alienate us. Hamilton opened my eyes and gave me   
new values, and though later I was to lose the vision which he had bequeathed me,   
nevertheless I could never again see the world, or my friends, as I had seen them prior to   
his coming. Hamilton altered me profoundly, as only a rare book, a rare personality, a rare   
experience, can alter one. For the first time in my life I understood what it was to   
experience a vital friendship and yet not to feel enslaved or attached because of the   
experience. Never, after we parted, did I feel the need of 
 
136 
 
his actual presence: he had given himself completely and I possessed him without being   
possessed. It was the first dean, whole experience of friendship, and it was never   
duplicated by any other friend. Hamilton was friendship itself, rather than a friend. He   
was the symbol personified and consequently entirely satisfactory hence no longer necessary   
to me. He himself understood this thoroughly. Perhaps it was the fact of having no father   
that pushed him along the road towards the discovery of the self, which is the final   
process of identification with the world and the realization consequently of the useless- 
ness of ties. Certainly, as he stood then, in the full plenitude of self-realization, no   
one was necessary to him, least of all the father of flesh and blood whom he vainly sought   
in M r. MacGregor. It must have been in the nature of a last test for him, his coming East   
and seeking out his real father, for when he said good-bye, when he renounced Air.   
MacGregor and Mr. Hamilton also, he was like a man who had purified himself of all dross.   
Never have I seen a man look so single, so utterly alone and alive and confident of the   
future as Roy Hamilton looked when he said good-bye. And never have I seen such confusion   
and misunderstanding as he left behind with the M acGregor family. It was as though he had   
died in their midst, had been resurrected, and was taking leave of them as an utterly new,   
unknown individual. I can see them now standing in the areaway, their hands sort of   
foolishly, helplessly empty, weeping they knew not why, unless it was because they were   
bereft of something they had never possessed. I like to think of it in just this way. They   
were bewildered and bereft, and vaguely, so very vaguely aware that somehow a great   
opportunity had been offered them which they had not the strength or the imagination to   
seize. It was this which the foolish, empty fluttering of the hands indicated to me: it was   
a gesture more painful to witness than anything I can imagine. It gave me the feeling of   
the horrible inadequacy of the world when brought face to face with truth. It gave me the   
feeling of the stupidity of the blood tie and of the love which is not spiritually imbued.   
I look back rapidly and I see myself again in California. I am 
 
137 
 
 
 
 90 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
alone and I am working like a slave in the orange grove at Chula Vista. Am I coming into my   
own? I think not. I am a very wretched, forlorn, miserable person. I seem to have lost   
everything. In fact I am hardly a person -1 am more nearly an animal. All day long I am   
standing    or    walking    behind    the    two    jackasses    which    are    hitched    to    my    sledge.    I    have    no   
thoughts, no dreams, no desires. I am thoroughly healthy and empty. I am a nonentity. I am   
so thoroughly alive and healthy that I am like the luscious deceptive fruit which hangs on   
the Californian trees. One more ray of sun and I will be rotten.    "Pourri avant d'etre   
muri!" 
 
Is it really me that is rotting in this bright California sunshine? Is there nothing left   
of me, of all that I was up to this moment? Let me think a bit... There was Arizona. I   
remember now that it was already night when I first set foot on Arizona soil. Just light   
enough to catch the last glimpse of a fading mesa. I am walking through the main street of   
a little town whose name is lost. What am I doing here on this street, in this town? Why, I   
am in love with Arizona, an Arizona of the mind which I search for in vain with my two good   
eyes. In the train there was still with me the Arizona which I had brought from New York -   
even after we had crossed the state line. Was there not a bridge over a canyon which had   
startled me out of my reverie? A bridge such as I had never seen before, a natural bridge   
created by a cataclysmic eruption thousands of years ago? And over this bridge I had seen a   
man crossing, a man who looked like an Indian, and he was riding a horse and there was a   
long saddle-bag hanging beside the stirrup. A natural millenary bridge which in the dying   
sun with air so clear looked like the youngest, newest bridge imaginable. And over that   
bridge so strong, so durable, there passed, praise be to God, just a man and a horse,   
nothing more. This then was Arizona, and Arizona was not a figment of the imagination but   
the imagination itself dressed as a horse and rider. And this was even more than the   
imagination itself because there was no aura of ambiguity but only sharply and dead isolate   
the thing itself which was the dream and the dreamer himself seated on horseback. And as   
the train stops I put my foot down and my 
 
138 
 
foot has put a deep hole in the dream: I am in the Arizona town which is listed in the   
timetable and it is only the geographical Arizona which anybody can visit who has the   
money. I am walking along the main street with a valise and I see hamburger sandwiches and   
real estate offices. I feel so terribly deceived and I begin to weep. It is dark now and I   
stand at the end of a street, where the desert begins, and I weep like a fool. Which me is   
this weeping? Why it is the new little me which had begun to germinate back in Brooklyn and   
which is now in the midst of a vast desert and doomed to perish. Now, Roy Hamilton, I need     
you!    I need you for one moment, just one little moment, while I am falling apart. I need   
you because I was not quite ready to do what I have done. And do I not remember your   
telling me that it was unnecessary to make the trip, but to do it if I must? Why didn't you   
persuade me not to go? Ah, to persuade was never his way. And to ask advice was never my   
way. So here I am, bankrupt in the desert, and the bridge which was real is behind me and   
what is unreal is before me and Christ only knows I am so puzzled and bewildered that if I   
 91 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could sink into the earth and disappear I would do so. 
 
I look back rapidly and I see another man who was left to perish quietly in the bosom of   
his family -    my father.    I understand better what happened to him if I go back very, very   
far and think of such streets as Maujer, Conselyea, Humboldt... Humboldt particularly.   
These streets belonged to a neighbourhood which was not far removed from our neighbourhood   
but which was different, more glamorous, more mysterious. I had been on Humboldt Street   
only once as a child and I no longer remember the reason for that excursion unless it was   
to visit some sick relative languishing in a German hospital. But the street itself made a   
most lasting impression upon me: why I have not the faintest idea. It remains in my memory   
as the most mysterious and the most promising street that ever I have seen. Perhaps when we   
were making ready to go my mother had, as usual, promised something spectacular as a reward   
for accompanying her. I was always being promised things which never materialized. Perhaps   
then, when I got to 
 
139 
 
Humboldt Street and looked upon this new world with astonishment, perhaps I forgot   
completely what had been promised me and the street itself became the reward. I remember   
that it was very wide and that there were high stoops, such as I had never seen before, on   
either side of the street. I remember too that in a dressmaker's shop on the first floor of   
one of these strange houses there was a bust in the window with a tape measure slung around   
the neck and I know that I was greatly moved by this sight. There was snow on the ground   
but the sun was out strong and I recall vividly how about the bottoms of the ash barrels   
which had been frozen into the ice there was then a little pool of water left by the   
melting snow. The whole street seemed to be melting in the radiant winter's sun. On the   
bannisters of the high stoops the mounds of snow which had formed such beautiful white pads   
were now beginning to slide, to disintegrate, leaving dark patches of the brown stone which   
was then much in vogue. The little glass signs of the dentists and physicians, tucked away   
in the comers of the windows, gleamed brilliantly in the noonday sun and gave me the   
feeling for the first time that these offices were perhaps not the torture chambers which I   
knew them to be. I imagined, in my childish way, that here in this neighbourhood, in this   
street particularly, people were more friendly, more expansive, and of course infinitely   
more wealthy. I must have expanded greatly myself though only a tot, because for the first   
time I was looking upon a street which seemed devoid of terror. It was the sort of street,   
ample, luxurious, gleaming, melting which later, when I began reading Dostoievski, I   
associated with the thaws of St. Petersburg. Even the churches here were of a different   
style    of    architecture;    there    was    something    semi-Oriental    about    them,    something    grandiose   
and warm at the same time, which both frightened me and intrigued me. On this broad,   
spacious street I saw that the houses were set well back from the sidewalk, reposing in   
quiet and dignity, and unmarred by the intercalation of shops and factories and veterinary   
stables. I saw a street composed of nothing but residences and I was filled with awe and   
admiration. All this I remember and no doubt it influenced me greatly, yet none of 
 
 
 
 92 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
140 
 
this is sufficient to account for the strange power and attraction which the very mention   
of Humboldt Street still evokes in me. Some years later I went back in the night to look at   
this street again, and I was even more stirred than when I had looked upon it for the first   
time. The aspect of the street of course had changed, but it was night and the night is   
always less cruel than the day. Again I experienced the strange delight of spadousness of   
that luxuriousness which was now somewhat faded but still redolent, still assertive in a   
patchy way as once the brown stone bannisters had asserted themselves through the melting   
snow. Most distinct of all, however, was the almost voluptuous sensation of being on the   
verge of a discovery. Again I was strongly aware of my mother's presence, of the big puffy   
sleeves of her fur coat, of the cruel swiftness with which she had whisked me through the   
street years ago and of the stubborn tenacity with which I had feasted my eyes on all that   
was new and strange. On the occasion of this second visit I seemed to dimly recall another   
character out of my childhood, the old housekeeper whom they called by the outlandish name   
of Mrs. Kicking. I could not recall her being taken ill but I did seem to recall the fact   
that we were paying her a visit at the hospital where she was dying and that this hospital   
must have been near Humboldt Street which was not dying but which was radiant in the   
melting snow of a winter's noon. What then had my mother promised me that I have never   
since been able to recall? Capable as she was of promising anything, perhaps that day, in a   
fit of abstraction, she had promised something so preposterous that even I with all my   
childish credulence could not quite swallow it. And yet, if she had promised me the moon,   
though I knew it was out of the question, I would have struggled to invest her promise with   
a crumb of faith. I wanted desperately everything that was promised me, and if, upon   
reflection I realized that it was dearly impossible, I nevertheless tried in my own way to   
grope for a means of making these promises realizable. That people could make promises   
without ever having the least intention of fulfilling them was something unimaginable to   
me. Even when I was most cruelly deceived I still believed; I found that something 
 
141 
 
extraordinary and quite beyond the other person's power had intervened to make the promise   
null and void. 
 
This question of belief, this old promise that was never fulfilled, is what makes me think   
of my father who was deserted at the moment of his greatest need. Up to the time of his   
illness neither my father nor my mother had ever shown any religious inclinations. Though   
always upholding the church to others, they themselves never set foot in a church from the   
time that they were married. Those who attended church too regularly they looked upon as   
being a bit daffy. The very way they said -"so and so is religious" - was enough to convey   
the scorn and contempt, or else the pity, which they felt for such individuals. If now and   
then, because of us children, the pastor called at the house unexpectedly, he was treated   
as one to whom they were obliged to defer out of ordinary politeness but whom they had   
nothing in common with, whom they were a little suspicious of, in fact as representative of   
 93 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a species midway between a fool and a charlatan. To us, for example, they would say "a   
lovely man", but when their cronies came round and the gossip began to fly, then one would   
hear an entirely different brand of comment, accompanied usually by peals of scornful   
laughter and sly mimicry. 
 
My father fell mortally ill as a result of swearing off too abruptly. All his life he had   
been a jolly hail fellow well met: he had put on a rather becoming paunch, his cheeks were   
well filled out and red as a beet, his manners were easy and indolent, and he seemed   
destined to live on into a ripe old age, sound and healthy as a nut. But beneath this   
smooth and jolly exterior things were not at all well. His affairs were in bad shape, the   
debts were piling up, and already some of his older friends were beginning to drop him. My   
mother's attitude was what worried him most. She saw things in a black light and she took   
no trouble to conceal it. Now and then she became hysterical and went at him hammer and   
tongs, swearing at him in the vilest language and smashing the dishes and threatening to   
run away for good. The upshot of it was that he arose one morning determined never to touch   
another drop. Nobody believed that he meant it seriously: there had been others in the   
family who 
 
142 
 
swore off, who went on the water wagon, as they used to say, but who quickly tumbled off   
again. No one in the family, and they had all tried at different times, had ever become a   
successful teetotaler. But my old rnan was different. Where or how he got the strength to   
maintain his resolution. God only knows. It seems incredible to me, because had I been in   
his boots myself I would have drunk myself to death. Not the old man, however. This was the   
first time in his life he had ever shown any resolution about anything. My mother was so   
astounded that, idiot that she was, she began to make fun of him, to quip him about his   
strength of will which had heretofore been so lamentably weak. Still he stuck to his guns.   
His drinking pals faded away rather quickly. In short, he soon found himself almost   
completely isolated. That must have cut him to the quick, for before very many weeks had   
passed, he became deathly ill and a consultation was held. He recovered a bit, enough to   
get out of bed and walk about, but still a very sick man. He was supposed to be suffering   
from ulcers of the stomach, though nobody was quite sure exactly what ailed him. Everybody   
understood, however, that he had made a mistake in swearing off so abruptly. It was too   
late, however, to return to a temperate mode of living. His stomach was so weak that it   
wouldn't even hold a plate of soup. In a couple of months he was almost a skeleton. And   
old. He looked like Lazarus raised from the grave. 
 
One day my mother took me aside and with tears in her eyes begged me to go visit the family   
doctor and learn the truth about my father's condition. Dr. Rausch had been the family   
physician for years. He was a typical "Dutchman" of the old school, rather weary and   
crochety now after years of practising and yet unable to tear himself completely away from   
his patients. In his stupid Teutonic way he tried to scare the less serious patients away,   
tried to argue them into health, as it were. When you walked into his office he didn't even   
 94 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bother to look up at you, but kept on writing or whatever it might be that he was doing   
while firing random questions at you in a perfunctory and insulting manner. He behaved so   
rudely, so suspiciously, that ridiculous as it may sound, it almost appeared 
 
143 
 
as    though    he    expected    his    patients    to    bring    with    them    not    only    their    ailments,    but    the   
proof of    their ailments. He made one feel that there was not only something wrong   
physically but that there was also something wrong mentally. "You only imagine it," was his   
favourite phrase which he flung out with a nasty, leering gibe. Knowing him as I did, and   
detesting him heartily, I came prepared, that is, with the laboratory analysis of my   
father's stool. I had also analysis of his urine in my overcoat pocket, should he demand   
further proof. 
 
When I was a boy Dr. Rausch had shown some affection for me, but ever since the day I went   
to him with a dose of clap he had lost confidence in me and always showed a sour puss when   
I stuck my head through the door. Like father like son was his motto, and I was therefore   
not at all surprised when, instead of giving me the information which I demanded, he began   
to lecture me and the old man at the same time for our way of living. "You can't go against   
Nature," he said with a wry, solemn face, not looking at me as he uttered the words but   
making    some    useless    notation    in    his    big    ledger.    I    walked    quietly    up    to    his    desk,    stood   
beside him a moment without making a sound, and then, when he looked up with his usual   
aggrieved, irritated expression, I said - "I didn't come here for moral instruction ... I   
want to know what's the matter with my father." At this he jumped up and turning to me with   
his most severe look, he said, like the stupid, brutal Dutchman that he was: "Your father   
hasn't a chance of recovering; he'll be dead in less than six months." I said "Thank you,   
that's all I wanted to know," and I made for the door. Then, as though he felt that he had   
committed a blunder, he strode after me heavily and, putting his hand on my shoulder, he   
tried to modify the statement by hemming and hawing and saying I don't mean that it is   
absolutely certain he will die, etc., which I cut short by opening the door and yelling at   
him, at the top of my lungs, so that his patients in the anteroom would hear it - "I think   
you're a goddamned old fart and I hope you croak, good-night!" 
 
When I got home I modified the doctor's report somewhat by saying that my father's   
condition was very serious but that 
 
144 
 
if he took good care of himself he would pull through all right. This seemed to cheer the   
old man up considerably. Of his own accord he took to a diet of milk and Zwieback which,   
whether it was the best thing or not, certainly did    him    no harm. He remained a sort of   
semi-invalid for about a year, becoming more and more calm inwardly as time went on and   
apparently determined to let nothing, disturb his peace of mind, nothing, no matter if   
everything went to hell. As he grew stronger he took to making a daily promenade to the   
 
 
 95 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
cemetery which was nearby. There he would sit on a bench in the sun and watch the old   
people potter around the graves. The proximity to the grave, instead of rendering him   
morbid, seemed to cheer him up. He seemed, if anything, to have become reconciled to the   
idea of eventual death, a fact which no doubt he had heretofore refused to look in the   
face. Often he came home with flowers which he had picked in the cemetery, his face beaming   
with a quiet serene joy, and seating himself in the armchair he would recount the   
conversation which he had had that morning with one of the other valetudinarians who   
frequented the cemetery. It was obvious after a time that he was really enjoying his   
sequestration, or rather not just enjoying it, but profiting deeply from the experience in   
a way that was beyond my mother's intelligence to fathom. He was getting lazy, was the way   
she expressed it. Sometimes she put it even more extremely, tapping her head with her   
forefinger as she spoke of him, but not saying anything overfly because of my sister who   
was without question a little wrong in the head. 
 
And then one day, through the courtesy of an old widow who used to visit her son's grave   
every day and was, as my mother would say, "religious" he made the acquaintance of a   
minister belonging to one of the neighbouring churches. This was a momentous event in the   
old    man's    life.    Suddenly    he    blossomed    forth    and    that    little    sponge    of    a    soul    which    had   
almost atrophied through lack of nourishment took on such astounding proportions that he   
was almost unrecognizable. The man who was responsible for this extraordinary change in the   
old man was in no way unusual himself; he was a Congregationalist minister attached to a   
modest little parish which adjoined our neighbour- 
 
145 
 
hood. His one virtue was that he kept his religion in the background. The old man quickly   
fell into a sort of boyish idolatry; he talked of nothing but this minister whom he   
considered his friend. As he had never looked at the Bible in his life, nor any other book   
for that matter, it was rather startling, to say the least, to hear him say a little prayer   
before eating. He performed this little ceremony in a strange way, much the way one takes a   
tonic, for example. If he recommended me to read a certain chapter of the Bible he would   
add very seriously - "it will do you good." It was a new medicine which he had discovered,   
a sort of quack remedy which was guaranteed to cure all ills and which one might even take   
if he had no ills, because in any case it could certainly do no harm. He attended all the   
services, all the functions which were held at the church, and between times, when out for   
a stroll, for example, he would stop off at the minister's home and have a little chat with   
him. If the minister said that the president was a good soul and should be re-elected the   
old man would repeat to every one exactly what the minister had said and urge them to vote   
for the president's re-election. Whatever the minister said was right and just and nobody   
could gainsay him. There's no doubt that it was an education for the old man. If the   
minister had mentioned the pyramids in the course of his sermon the old man immediately   
began to inform himself about the pyramids. He would talk about the pyramids as though   
every one owed it to himself to become acquainted with the subject. The minister had said   
that the pyramids were one of the crowning glories of man, ergo not to know about the   
 96 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pyramids was to be disgracefully ignorant, almost sinful. Fortunately the minister didn't   
dwell much on the subject of sin: he was of the modem type of preacher who prevailed on his   
flock more by arousing their curiosity than by appealing to their conscience. His sermons   
were    more    like    a    night    school    extension    course    and    for    such    as    the    old    man,    therefore,   
highly entertaining and stimulating. Every now and then the male members of the   
congregation were invited to a little blow-out which was intended to demonstrate that the   
good pastor was just an ordinary man like themselves and could, on occasion, 
 
146 
 
enjoy a hearty meal and even a glass of beer. Moreover it was observed that he even sang -   
not religious hymns, but jolly little songs of the popular variety. Putting two and two   
together one might even infer from such jolly behaviour that now and then he enjoyed   
getting a little piece of tail - always in moderation, to be sure. That was the word that   
was balsam to the old man's lacerated soul - "moderation". It was like discovering a new   
sign in the zodiac. And though he was still too ill to attempt a return to even a moderate   
way of living, nevertheless it did his soul good. And so, when Uncle Ned, who was   
continually going on the water-waggon and continually falling off it again, came round to   
the house one evening the old man delivered him a little lecture on the virtue of   
moderation. Uncle Ned was, at that moment,    on    the water-waggon and so, when the old man,   
moved by his own words, suddenly went to the sideboard to fetch a decanter of wine every   
one was shocked. No one had ever dared invite Uncle Ned to drink when he had sworn off; to   
venture such a thing constituted a serious breach of loyalty. But the old man did it with   
such conviction that no one could take offence, and the result was that Uncle Ned took a   
small glass of wine and went home that evening without stopping off at a saloon to quench   
his thirst. It was an extraordinary happening and there was much talk about it for days   
after. In fact. Uncle Ned began to act a bit queer from that day on. It seems that he went   
the next day to the wine store and bought a bottle of Sherry which he emptied into the   
decanter. He placed the decanter on the sideboard, just as he had seen the old man do, and,   
instead of polishing it off in one swoop, he contented himself with a glassful at a time -   
"just a thimbleful", as he put it. His behaviour was so remarkable that my aunt, who was   
unable to quite believe her eyes, came one day to the house and held a long conversation   
with the old man. She asked him, among other things, to invite the minister to the house   
some evening so that Uncle Ned might have the opportunity of falling under his beneficient   
influence. The long and short of it was 
  t Ned was soon taken into the fold and, like the   
old man, seemed to be thriving under the experience. Things went fine until the day of the   
picnic. 
 
147 
 
That day, unfortunately, was an unusually warm day and, what with the games, the   
excitement, the hilarity. Uncle Ned developed an extraordinary thirst. It was not until he   
was three sheets to the wind that some one observed the regularity and the frequency with   
which he was running to the beer keg. It was then too late. Once in that condition he was   
 97 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unmanageable. Even the minister could do nothing with him. Ned broke away from the picnic   
quietly and went on a little rampage which lasted for three days and nights. Perhaps it   
would have lasted longer had he not gotten into a fist fight down at the waterfront where   
he was found lying unconscious by the night watchman. He was taken to the hospital with a   
concussion of the brain from which he never recovered. Returning from the funeral the old   
man said with a dry eye - "Ned didn't know what it was to be temperate. It was his own   
fault. Anyway, he's better off now ..." 
 
And as though to prove to the minister that he was not made of the same stuff as Uncle Ned   
he became even more assiduous in his churchly duties. He had gotten himself promoted to the   
position of "elder", an office of which he was extremely proud and by grace of which he was   
permitted during the Sunday services to aid in taking up the collection. To think of my old   
man marching up the aisle of a Congregationalist church with a collection box in his hand;   
to think of him standing reverently before the altar with this collection box while the   
minister blessed the offering, seems to me now something so incredible that I scarcely know   
what to say of it. I like to think, by contrast, of the man he was when I was just a kid   
and I would meet him at the ferry house of a Saturday noon. Surrounding the entrance to the   
ferry house there were then three saloons which of a Saturday noon were filled with men who   
had stopped off for a little bite at the free lunch counter and a schooner of beer. I can   
see the old man, as he stood in his thirtieth year, a healthy, genial soul with a smile for   
every one and a pleasant quip to pass the time of day, see him with his arm resting on the   
bar, his straw hat tipped on the back of his head, his left hand raised to down the foaming   
suds. My eye was then on about a level with his heavy gold chain which was spread 
 
148 
 
cross-wise over his vest; I remember the shepherd plaid suit which he wore in mid-summer   
and the distinction it gave him among the other men at the bar who were not lucky enough to   
have been born tailors. I remember the way he would dip his hand into the big glass bowl on   
the free lunch counter and hand me a few pretzels, saying at the same time that I ought to   
go and have a look at the scoreboard in the window of the Brooklyn Times nearby. And,   
perhaps, as I ran out of the saloon to see who was winning a string of cyclists would pass   
close to the curb, holding to the little strip of asphalt which had been laid down   
expressly for them. Perhaps the ferry-boat was just coming into the dock and I would stop a   
moment to watch the men in uniform as they pulled away at the big wooden wheels to which   
the chains were attached. As the gates were thrown open and the planks laid down a mob   
would rush through the shed and make for the saloons which adorned the nearest comers.   
Those were the days when the old man knew the meaning of "moderation", when he drank   
because he was truly thirsty, and to down a schooner of beer by the ferry house was a man's   
prerogative. Then it was as Melville has so well said: "Feed all things with food   
convenient for them - that is, if the food be procurable. The food of thy soul is light and   
space; feed it then on light and space. But the food of the body is champagne and oysters;   
feed    it    then    on    champagne    and    oysters;    and    so    shall    it    merit    a    joyful    resurrection,    if   
there is any to be." Yes, then it seems to me that the old man's soul had not yet   
 98 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shrivelled up, that it was endlessly bounded by light and space and that his body, heedless   
of the resurrection, was feeding on all that was convenient and procurable - if not   
champagne and oysters, at least good lager beer and pretzels. Then his body had not been   
condemned, nor his way of living, nor his absence of faith. Nor was he yet surrounded by   
vultures, but only by good comrades, ordinary mortals like himself who looked neither high   
nor low but straight ahead, the eye always fixed on the horizon and content with the sight   
thereof. 
 
And now, as a battered wreck, he has made himself into an elder of the church and he stands   
before the altar, grey and bent 
 
149 
 
and withered, while the minister gives his blessing to the measly collection which will go   
to make a new bowling alley. Perhaps it was necessary for him to experience the birth of   
the soul, to feed this sponge-like growth with that light and space which the   
Congregational church offered. But what a poor substitute for a man who had known the joys   
of that food which the body craved and which, without the pangs of conscience, had flooded   
even his sponge-like soul with a light and space that was ungodly but radiant and   
terrestrial. I think again of his seemly little "corporation" over which the thick gold   
chain was strung and I think that with that death of his paunch there was left to survive   
only    the sponge    of a    soul, a    sort of    appendix to    his own    bodily death.    I think    of the   
minister who had swallowed him up as a sort of inhuman sponge-eater, the keeper of a wigwam   
hung with spiritual scalps. I think of what subsequently ensued as a kind of tragedy in   
sponges, for though he promised light and space, no sooner had he passed out of my father's   
life than the whole airy edifice came tumbling down. 
 
It all came about in the most ordinary lifelike way. One evening, after the customary men's   
meeting, the old man came home with a sorrowful countenance. They had been informed that   
evening that the minister was taking leave of them. He had been offered a more advantageous   
position in the township of New Rochelle and, despite his great reluctance to desert his   
flock, he had decided to accept the oner. He had of course accepted it only after much   
meditation - as a duty, in other words. It would mean a better income, to be sure, but that   
was nothing compared to the grave responsibilities which he was about to assume. They had   
need of him in New Rochelle and he was obeying the voice of his conscience. All this the   
old man related with the same unctuousness that the minister had given to his words. But it   
was immediately apparent that the old man was hurt. He couldn't see why New Rochelle could   
not find another minister. He said it wasn't fair to tempt the minister with a bigger   
salary.    We need him here,    he said ruefully, with such sadness that I almost felt like   
weeping. He added, that he was going to have a heart to heart talk with the minister 
 
150 
 
that if anybody could persuade him to remain it was he. In the days that followed he   
 99 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certainly did his best, no doubt much to the minister's discomfiture. It was distressing to   
see the blank look in his face when he returned from these conferences. He had the   
expression of a man who was trying to grasp at a straw to keep from drowning. Naturally the   
minister remained adamant. Even when the old man broke down and wept before him he could   
not be moved to change his mind. That was the turning point. From that moment on the old   
man underwent a radical change. He seemed to grow bitter and querulous. He not only forgot   
to say grace at the table but he abstained from going to church. He resumed his old habit   
of going to the cemetery and basking on a bench. He became morose, then melancholy, and   
finally there grew into his face an expression of permanent sadness, a sadness encrusted   
with disillusionment, with despair, with futility. He never again mentioned the man's name,   
nor the church, nor any of the elders with whom he had once associated. If he happened to   
pass them in the street he bade them the time of day without stopping to shake hands. He   
read the newspapers diligently, from back to front, without comment. Even the ads he read,   
every one, as though trying to block up a huge hole which was constantly before his eyes. I   
never heard him laugh again. At the most he would give us a sort of weary, hopeless smile,   
a smile which faded instantly and left us with the spectacle of a life extinct. He was dead   
as a crater, dead beyond all hope of resurrection. And not even had he been given a new   
stomach, or a tough new intestinal tract, would it have been possible to restore him to   
life    again.    He    had    passed    beyond    the    lure    of    champagne    and    oysters,    beyond    the    need    of   
light and space. He was like the dodo which buries its head in the sand and whistles out of   
its ass-hole. When he went to sleep in the M orris-chair his lower jaw dropped like a hinge   
that has become unloosened; he had always been a good snorer but now he snored louder than   
ever, like a man who was in truth dead to the world. His snores, in fact, were very much   
like the death rattle, except that they were punctuated by an intermittent long-drawn-out   
whistling of the peanut stand variety. He 
 
151 
 
seemed, when he snored, to be chopping the whole universe to bits so that we who succeeded   
him would have enough kindling wood to last a lifetime. It was the most horrible and   
fascinating snoring that I have ever listened to: it was sterterous and stentorian, morbid   
and grotesque; at times it was like an accordion collapsing, at other times like a frog   
croaking in the swamps; after a prolonged whistle there sometimes followed a frightful   
wheeze as if he were giving up the ghost, then it would settle back again into a regular   
rise and fall, a steady hollow chopping as though he stood stripped to the waist, with axe   
in hand, before the accumulated madness of all the bric-a-brac of this world. What gave   
these performances a slightly crazy quality was the mummy -like expression of the face in   
which the big blubber lips alone came to life; they were like the gills of a shark snoozing   
on the surface of the still ocean. Blissfully he snored away on the bosom of the deep,   
never disturbed by a dream or a draught, never fitful, never plagued by an unsatisfied   
desire; when he closed his eyes and collapsed, the light of the world went out and he was   
alone as before birth, a cosmos gnashing itself to bits. He sat there in his Morris-chair   
as Jonah must have sat in the body of the whale, secure in the last refuge of a black hole,   
expecting nothing, desiring nothing, not dead but buried alive, swallowed whole and   
 100 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unscathed, the big blubber lips gently flapping with the flux and reflux of the white   
breath of emptiness. He was in the land of Nod searching for Cain and Abel but encountering   
no living soul, no word, no sign. He dove with the whale and scraped the icy black bottom;   
he covered furlongs at top speed, guided only by the fleecy manes of undersea beasts. He   
was the smoke that curled out of the chimney-tops, the heavy layers of cloud that obscured   
the moon, the thick slime that made the slippery linoleum floor of the ocean depths. He was   
deader than dead because alive and empty, beyond all hope of resurrection in that he had   
travelled beyond the limits of light and space and securely nestled himself in the black   
hole of nothingness. He was more to be envied than pitied, for his sleep was not a lull or   
an interval but sleep itself which is the deep and hence sleeping ever deepening, deeper   
and deeper 
 
152 
 
in sleep sleeping, the sleep of the deep in deepest sleep, at the nethermost depth full   
slept, the deepest and sleepest sleep of sleep's sweet sleep. He was asleep. He is asleep.   
He will be asleep. Sleep. Sleep. Father, sleep, I beg you, for we who are awake are boiling     
in horror . . . 
 
With the world fluttering away on the last wings of a hollow snore I see the door opening   
to admit Grover Watrous. "Christ be with you!" he says, dragging his club foot along. He is   
quite a young man now and he has found God. There is only one God and Grover Watrous has   
found Him and so there is nothing more to say except that everything has to be said over   
again in Grover Watrous' new God-language. This bright new language which God invented   
especially for Grover Watrous intrigues me enormously, first because I had always   
considered Grover to be a hopeless dunce, second because I notice that there are no longer   
any tobacco stains on his agile fingers. When we were boys Grover lived next door to us. He   
would visit me from time to time in order to practise a duet with me. Though he was only   
fourteen or fifteen he smoked like a trooper. His mother could do nothing against it   
because Grover was a genius and a genius had to have a little liberty, particularly when he   
was also unfortunate enough to have been born with a club foot. Grover was the kind of   
genius who thrives on dirt. He not only had nicotine stains on his fingers but he had   
filthy black nails which would break under hours of practising, imposing upon young Grover   
the ravishing obligation of tearing them off with his teeth. Grover used to spit out broken   
nails along with bits of tobacco which got caught in his teeth. It was delightful and   
stimulating. The cigarettes burned holes into the piano and, as my mother critically   
observed, also    tarnished    the keys. When Grover took leave the parlour stank like the   
backroom of an undertaker's establishment. It stank of dead cigarettes, sweat, dirty linen,   
Grover's oaths and the dry heat left by the dying notes of Weber, Berlioz, Liszt and Co. It   
stank too of Grover's running ear and of his decaying teeth. It stank of his mother's   
pampering and whimpering. His own home was a stable divinely suited to his genius, but the   
parlour of our home was like the waiting room of a mortician's 
 
153 
 101 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
office and Grover was a lout who didn't even know enough to wipe his feet. In the winter   
time his nose ran like a sewer and Grover, being too engrossed in his music to bother   
wiping his nose, the cold snot was left to trickle down until it reached his lips where it   
was sucked in by a very long white tongue. To the flatulent music of Weber, Berlioz, Liszt   
and Co. it added a piquant sauce which made those empty devils palatable. Every other word   
from Grover's lips was an oath, his favourite expression being - "I can't get the fucking   
thing right!" Sometimes he grew so annoyed that he would take his fists and pound the piano   
like a madman. It was his genius coming out the wrong way. His mother, in fact, used to   
attach a great deal of importance to these fits of anger; they convinced her that he had   
something in him. Other people simply said that Grover was impossible. M uch was forgiven,   
however, because of his club foot. Grover was sly enough to exploit this bad foot; whenever   
he wanted anything badly he developed pains in the foot. Only the piano seemed to have no   
respect for this maimed member. The piano therefore was an object to be cursed and kicked   
and pounded to bits. If he were in good form, on the other hand, Grover would remain at the   
piano for hours on end; in fact, you couldn't drag him away. On such occasions his mother   
would go stand in the grass plot in front of the house and waylay the neighbours in order   
to squeeze a few words of praise out of them. She would be so carried away by her son's   
"divine" playing that she would forget to cook the evening meal. The old man, who worked in   
the sewers, usually came home grumpy and famished. Sometimes he would march directly   
upstairs to the parlour and yank Grover off the piano stool. He had a rather foul   
vocabulary himself and when he let loose on his genius of a son there wasn't much left for   
Grover to say. In the old man's opinion Grover was just a lazy son of a bitch who could   
make a lot of noise. Now and then he threatened to chuck the fucking piano out of the   
window - and Grover with it. If the mother were rash enough to interfere during these   
scenes he would give her a clout and tell her to go piss up the end of a rope. He had his   
moments of weakness too, of course, and in such a mood he might ask Grover what the hell 
 
154 
 
he was rattling away at, and if the latter said, for example, "why the Sonata Pathetique",   
the old buzzard would say - "what the hell does that mean? Why, in Christ's name don't they   
put it down in plain English?" The old man's ignorance was even harder for Grover to bear   
than his brutality. He was heartily ashamed of his old man and when the latter was out of   
sight he would ridicule him unmercifully. When he got a little older he used to insinuate   
that he wouldn't have been born with a club foot if the old man hadn't been such a mean   
bastard. He said that the old man must have kicked his mother in the belly when she was   
pregnant. This alleged kick in the belly must have affected Grover in diverse ways, for   
when he had grown up to be quite a young man, as I was saying, he suddenly took to God with   
such a passion that there was no blowing your nose before him without first asking God's   
permission. 
 
Grover's conversion followed right upon the old man's deflation, which is why I am reminded   
of it. Nobody had seen the Watrouses for a number of years and then, right in the midst of   
a bloody snore, you might say, in pranced Grover scattering benedictions and calling upon   
 102 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
God as his witness as he rolled up his sleeves to deliver us from evil. What I noted first   
in him was the change in his personal appearance; he had been washed dean in the blood of   
the Lamb. He was so immaculate, indeed, that there was almost a perfume emanating from him.   
His speech too had been cleaned up, instead of wild oaths there were now nothing but   
blessings and invocations. It was not a conversation which he held with us but a monologue   
in which, if there were any questions, he answered them himself. As he took the chair which   
was offered    him    he said with the nimbleness of a jack-rabbit that God had given his only   
beloved Son in order that we might enjoy life everlasting. Did we really want this life   
everlasting - or were we simply going to wallow in the joys of the flesh and die without   
knowing salvation? The incongruity of mentioning the "joys of the flesh" to an aged couple,   
one of whom was sound asleep and snoring, never struck him, to be sure. He was so alive and   
jubilant in the first flush of God's merciful grace that he must have forgotten that my   
sister was dippy, for, without even 
 
155 
 
inquiring how she had been, he began to harangue her in this new-found spiritual palaver to   
which she was entirely impervious because, as I say, she was minus so many buttons that if   
he had been talking about chopped spinach it would have been just as meaningful to her. A   
phrase like "the pleasures of the flesh" meant to her something like a beautiful day with a   
red parasol. I could see by the way she sat on the edge of her chair and bobbed her head   
that she was only waiting for him to catch his breath in order to inform him that the   
pastor - her pastor, who was an Episcopalian - had just returned from Europe and that they   
were going to have a fair in the basement of the church where she would have a little booth   
fitted up with doylies from the five-and-ten cent store. In fact, no sooner had he paused a   
moment than she let loose - about the canals of Venice, the snow in the Alps, the dog carts   
in Brussels, the beautiful Uverwurst in M unich. She was not only religious, my sister, but   
she was clean daffy. Grover had just slipped in something about having seen a new heaven   
and a new earth...    for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away,    he said,   
mumbling the words in a sort of hysterical glissando in order to unburden himself of an   
oracular message about the New Jerusalem which God had established on earth and in which   
he, Grover Watrous, once foul of speech and marred by a twisted foot, had found the peace   
and the calm of the righteous. "There shall be no more death ..." he started to shout when   
my    sister    leaned    forward    and    asked    him    very    innocently    if    he    liked    to    bowl    because    the   
pastor had just installed a beautiful new bowling alley in the basement of the church and   
she knew he would be pleased to see Grover because he was a lovely man and he was kind to   
the poor. Grover said that it was a sin to bowl and that he belonged to no church because   
the churches were godless: he had even given up playing the piano because God needed him   
for higher things. "He that overcometh shall inherit all things," he added "and I will be   
his God, and he shall be my son." He paused again to blow his nose in a beautiful white   
handkerchief, whereupon my sister took the occasion to remind him that in the old days he   
always had a running nose but that he never wiped it. Grover listened 
 
156 
 103 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to her very solemnly and then remarked that he had been cured of many evil ways. At this   
point the old man woke up and, seeing Grover sitting beside him large as life, he was quite   
startled and for a moment or two he was not sure, it seemed, whether Grover was a morbid   
phenomenon of dream or an hallucination, but the sight of the clean handkerchief brought   
him quickly to his wits. "Oh, it's you!" he exclaimed. "The Watrous boy, what? Well, what   
in the name of all that's holy are you doing here?"  
 
"I came in the name of the Holy of Holies," said Grover unabashed. "I have been purified by   
the death on Calvary and I am here in Christ's sweet name that ye maybe redeemed and walk   
in light and power and glory." 
 
The old man looked dazed. "Well, what's come over you?" he said, giving Grover a feeble,   
consolatory smile. My mother had just come in from the kitchen and had taken a stand behind   
Grover's chair. By making a wry grimace with her mouth she was trying to convey to the old   
man that Grover was cracked. Even my sister seemed to realize that there was something   
wrong with him, especially when he had refused to visit the new bowling alley which her   
lovely pastor had expressly installed for young men such as Grover and his likes. 
 
What was the matter with Grover? Nothing, except that his feet were solidly planted on the   
fifth foundation of the great wall of the Holy City of Jerusalem, the fifth foundation made   
entirely of sardonyx, whence he commanded a view of a pure river of water of life issuing   
from the throne of God. And the sight of this river of life was to Grover like the bite of   
a thousand fleas in his lower colon. Not until he had run at least seven times around the   
earth would he be able to sit quietly on his ass and observe the blindness and the   
indifference of men with something like equanimity. He was alive and purged, and though to   
the eyes of the sluggish, sluttish spirits who are sane he was "cracked", to me he seemed   
infinitely better off this way than before. He was a pest who could do you no harm. If you   
listened to him long enough you became somewhat purged yourself, though perhaps   
unconvinced. Grover's bright new language always caught me in the midriff and through   
inordi- 
 
157 
 
nate laughter cleansed me of the dross accumulated by the sluggish sanity about me. He was   
alive as Ponce de Leon had hoped to be alive; alive as only a few men have ever been. And   
being unnaturally alive he didn't mind in the least if you laughed in his face, nor would   
he have minded if you had stolen the few possessions which were his. He was alive and   
empty, which is so close to Godhood that it is crazy. 
 
With his feet solidly planted on the great wall of the New Jerusalem Grover knew a joy   
which is incommensurable. Perhaps if he had not been born with a club foot he would not   
have known this incredible joy. Perhaps it was well that his father had kicked the mother   
in the belly while Grover was still in the womb. Perhaps it was that kick in the belly   
which had sent Grover soaring, which made him so thoroughly alive and awake that even in   
 104 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his sleep he was delivering God's messages. The harder he laboured the less he was   
fatigued. He had no more worries, no regrets, no clawing memories. He recognized no duties,   
no obligations, except to God. And what did God expect of him? Nothing, nothing ... except   
to sing His praises. God only asked of Grover Watrous that he reveal himself alive in the   
flesh. He only asked of him to be more and more alive. And when fully alive Grover was a   
voice and this voice was a flood which made all dead things into chaos and this chaos in   
turn became the mouth of the world in the very centre of which was the verb to be. In the     
beginning there was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. So God; was   
this strange little infinitive which is all there is - and is it not enough? For Grover it   
was more than enough: it was everything. Starting from this Verb what difference did it   
make which road he travelled? To leave the Verb was to travel away from the centre, to   
erect a Babel. Perhaps God had deliberately maimed Grover Watrous in order to hold him to   
the centre, to the Verb. By an invisible cord God held Grover Watrous to his stake which   
ran through the heart of the world and Grover became the fat goose which laid a golden egg   
every day . . . 
 
Why do I write of Grover Watrous? Because I have met thousands of people and none of them   
were alive in the way that Grover was. Most of them were more intelligent, many of 
 
158 
 
them were brilliant, some of them were even famous, but none were alive and empty as Grover   
was. Grover was inexhaustible. He was like a bit of radium which, even if buried under a   
mountain does not lose its power to give off energy. I had seen plenty of so-called   
energetic people before - is not America filled with them? - but never, in the shape of a   
human being, a reservoir of energy. And what created this inexhaustible reservoir of   
energy? An illumination. Yes, it happened in the twinkling of an eye, which is the only way   
that anything important ever does happen. Overnight all Grover's preconceived values were   
thrown overboard. Suddenly, just like that, he ceased moving as other people move. He put   
the brakes on and he kept the motor running. If once, like other people, he had thought it   
was necessary to get somewhere now he knew that somewhere was anywhere and therefore right   
here and so why move? Why not park the car and keep the motor running? M eanwhile the earth   
itself is turning and Grover knew it was turning and knew that he was turning with it. Is   
the earth getting anywhere? Grover must undoubtedly have asked himself this question and   
must undoubtedly have satisfied himself that it was    not    getting anywhere. Who, then, had   
said that we must get somewhere? Grover would inquire of this one and that where they were   
heading for and the strange thing was that although they were all heading for their   
individual destinations none of them ever stopped to reflect that the one inevitable   
destination for all alike was the grave. This puzzled Grover because nobody could convince   
him that death was not a certainty, whereas nobody could convince anybody else that any   
other destination was an uncertainty. Convinced of the dead certainty of death Grover   
suddenly became tremendously and overwhelmingly alive. For the first time in his life he   
began to live, and at the same time the dub foot dropped completely out of his   
consciousness. This is a strange thing, too, when you come to think of it, because the dub   
 105 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foot, just like death, was another ineluctable fact. Yet the dub foot dropped out of mind,   
or, what is more important, all that had been attached to the club foot. In the same way,   
having accepted death, death too dropped out of Grover's mind. Having seized on the single   
certainty of death all the uncertain- 
 
159 
 
ties vanished. The rest of the world was now limping along with dub-footed uncertainties   
and Grover Watrous alone was free and unimpeded. Grover Watrous was the personification of   
certainty. He may have been wrong, but he was certain. And what good does it do to be right     
if one has to limp along with a club foot? Only a few men have ever realized the truth of   
this and their names have become very great names. Grover Watrous will probably never be   
known, but he is very great just the same. This is probably the reason why I write about   
him - just the fact that I had enough sense to realize that Grover had achieved greatness   
even though nobody else will admit it. At the time I simply thought that Grover was a   
harmless fanatic, yes, a little "cracked", as my mother insinuated. But every man who has   
caught the truth of certitude was a little cracked and it is only these men who have   
accomplished anything for the world. Other men, other    great    men, have destroyed a little   
here and there, but these few whom I speak of, and among whom I include Grover Watrous,   
were capable of destroying everything in order that the truth might live. Usually these men   
were born with an impediment, with a dub foot, so to speak, and by a strange irony it is   
only the club foot which men remember. If a man like Grover becomes depossessed of his club   
foot, the world says that he has become "possessed". This is the logic of incertitude and   
its fruit is misery. Grover was the only truly joyous being I ever met in my life and this,   
therefore, is a little monument which I am erecting in his memory, in the memory of his   
joyous certitude. It is a pity that he had to use Christ for a crutch, but then what does   
it matter how one comes by the truth so long as one pounces upon it and lives by it? 
 
AN INTERLUDE     
 
Confusion is a word we have invented for an order which is not understood. I like to dwell   
on this period when things were taking shape because the order, if it were understood, must   
have been dazzling. In the first place there was Hymie, Hymie the bull-frog, and there were   
also his wife's ovaries which had been 
 
160 
 
rotting away for a considerable time. Hymie was completely wrapped up in his wife's rotting   
ovaries. It was the daily topic of conversation; it took precedence now over the cathartic   
pills and the coated tongue. Hymie dealt in "sexual proverbs", as he called them.   
Everything he said began from or led up to the ovaries. Despite everything he was still   
nicking it off with the wife - prolonged snake-life copulations in which he would smoke a   
cigarette or two before un-cunting. He would endeavour to explain to me how the pus from   
the rotting ovaries put her in heat. She had always been a good fuck, but now she was   
 106 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
better than ever. Once the ovaries were ripped out there'd be no telling how she'd take it.   
She seemed to realize that too. Ergo, fuck away! Every night, after the dishes were cleared   
away, they'd strip down in their little bird-like apartment and lay together like a couple   
of snakes. He tried to describe it to me on a number of occasions - the ways she fucked. It   
was like an oyster inside, an oyster with soft teeth that nibbled away at him. Sometimes it   
felt as though he were right inside her womb, so soft and fluffy it was, and those soft   
teeth biting away at his pecker and making him delirious. They used to lie scissors-fashion   
and look up at the ceiling. To keep from coming he would think about the office, about the   
little worries which plagued him and kept his bowels tied up in a knot. In between orgasms   
he would let his mind dwell on some one else, so that when she'd start working on him again   
he might imagine he was having a brand new fuck with a brand new cunt. He used to arrange   
it so that he could look out of the window while it was going on. He was getting so adept   
at it that he could undress a woman on the boulevard there under his window and transport   
her to the bed; not only that, but he could actually make her change places with his wife,   
all without un-cunting. Sometimes he'd fuck away like that for a couple of hours and never   
bother to shoot off. Why waste it! he would say. 
 
Steve Romero, on the other hand, had a hell of a time holding it in. Steve was built like a   
bull and he scattered his seed freely. We used to compare notes sometimes sitting in the   
Chop Suey joint around the comer from the office. It was a strange atmosphere. Maybe it was   
because there was no wine. M aybe it 
 
161 
 
was the funny little black mushrooms they served us. Anyway it wasn't difficult to get   
started on the subject. By the time Steve met us he would already have had his workout, a   
shower and a rubdown. He was dean inside and out. Almost a perfect specimen of a man. Not   
very bright, to be sure, but a good egg, a companion. Hymie, on the other hand, was like a   
toad. He seemed to come to the table direct from the swamps where he had passed a mucky   
day. Filth rolled off his lips like honey. In fact, you couldn't call it filth, in his   
case, because there wasn't any other ingredient with which you might compare it. It was all   
one fluid, a slimy, sticky substance made entirely of sex. When he looked at his food he   
saw it as potential sperm; if the weather were warm he would say it was good for the balls;   
if he took a trolley ride he knew in advance that the rhythmic movement of the trolley   
would stimulate his appetite, would give him a slow, "personal" hard-on, as he put it. Why   
"personal" I never found out, but that was his expression. He liked to go out with us   
because we were always reasonably sure of picking up something decent. Left to himself he   
didn't always fare so well. With us he got a change of meat - Gentile cunt, as he put it He   
liked Gentile cunt. Smelled sweeter, he said. Laughed easier too... Sometimes in the very   
midst of things. The one thing he couldn't tolerate was dark meat. It amazed and disgusted   
him to see me travelling around with Valeska. Once he asked me if she didn't smell kind of   
extra strong like. I told him I liked it that way - strong and smelly, with lots of gravy   
around it. He almost blushed at that. Amazing how delicate he could be about some things.   
Food, for example. Very finicky about his food. Perhaps a racial trait. Immaculate about   
 107 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his person, too. Couldn't stand the sight of a spot on his dean cuffs. Constantly brushing   
himself off, constantly taking his pocket mirror out to see if there were any food between   
his teeth. If he found a crumb he would hide his face behind the napkin and extract it with   
his pearlhandled toothpick. The ovaries of course he couldn't see. Nor could he smell them   
either, because his wife too was an immaculate bitch. Douching herself all day long in   
preparation for the evening nuptials. It was tragic, the importance she gave to her   
ovaries. 
 
l62 
 
Up until the day she was taken to the hospital she was a regular fucking block. The thought   
of never being able to fuck again frightened the wits out of her. Hymie of course told her   
it wouldn't make any difference to him one way or the other. Glued to her like a snake, a   
cigarette in his mouth, the girls passing below on the boulevard, it was hard for him to   
imagine a woman not being able to fuck any more. He was sure the operation would be   
successful.    Successful! That's to say that she'd fuck even better than before. He used to   
tell her that, lying on his back looking up at the ceiling. "You know I'll always love   
you," he would say. "M ove over just a little bit, will you ... there, like that... that's   
it. What was I saying? Oh yes... why sure, why should you worry about things like that? Of   
course I'll be true to you. Listen, pull away just a little bit... yeah, that's it...   
that's fine." He used to tell us about it in the Chop Suey joint. Steve would laugh like   
hell. Steve couldn't do a thing like that. He was too honest - especially with women.   
That's why he never had any luck. Little Curiey, for example -Steve hated Curiey - would   
always get what he wanted... He was a born liar, a born deceiver. Hymie didn't like Curiey   
much either. He said he was dishonest, meaning of course dishonest in money matters. About   
such things Hymie was scrupulous. What he disliked especially was the way Curiey talked   
about his aunt. It was bad enough, in Hymie's opinion, that he should be screwing the   
sister of his own mother, but to make her out to be nothing but a piece of stale cheese,   
that was too much for Hymie. One ought to have a bit of respect for a woman, provided she's   
not a whore. If she's a whore that's different. Whores are not women. Whores are whores.   
That was how Hymie looked at things. 
 
The real reason for his dislike, however, was that whenever they went out together Curiey   
always got the best choice. And not only that, but it was usually with Hymie's money that   
Curiey managed it. Even the way Curiey asked for money irritated Hymie - it was like   
extortion, he said. He thought it was partly my fault, that I was too lenient with the kid.   
"He's got no moral character," Hymie would say. "And what about you, your moral character?"   
I would ask. "Oh 
 
163 
 
to have any moral character. But Curley's only a kid." "You're jealous, that's what," Steve   
would say.    "M e ?    Me jealous of    him    ?" And he'd try to smother the idea with a scornful   
little laugh. It made him wince, a jab like that "Listen," he would say, turning to me,   
me I Shit, I'm too old 
 108 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"did I ever act jealous towards you? Didn't I always turn a girl over to you if you asked   
me? What about that redhaired girl in S.U. office... yon remember ... the one with the big   
teats? Wasn't that a nice piece of ass to turn over to a friend? But I did it, didn't I? I   
did it because you said you liked big teats. But I wouldn't do it for Curiey. He's a little   
crook. Let him do his own digging."  
 
As a matter of fact, Curley was digging away very industriously. He must have had five or   
six on the string at one time, from what I could gather. There was Valeska, for example -   
he had made himself pretty solid with her. She was so damned pleased to have some one fuck   
her without blushing that when it came to sharing him with her cousin and then with the   
midget she didn't put up the least objection. What she liked best was to get in the tub and   
let him fuck her under water. It was fine until the midget got wise to it. Then there was a   
nice rumpus which was finally ironed out on the parlour floor. To listen to Curiey talk he   
did everything but climb the chandeliers. And always plenty of pocket money to boot.   
Valeska was generous, but the cousin was a softy. If she came within a foot of a stiff   
prick she was like putty. An unbuttoned fly was enough to put her in a trance. It was   
almost shameful the things Curiey made her do. He took pleasure in degrading her. I could   
scarcely blame him for it, she was such a prim, priggish bitch in her street clothes. You'd   
almost swear she didn't own a cunt, the way she carried herself in the street. Naturally,   
when he got her alone he made her pay for her high-falutin' ways. He went at it cold- 
bloodedly. "Pish 'it out!" he'd say opening his fly a little. "Fish it out with your   
tongue!" (He had it in for the whole bunch because, as he put it, they were sucking one   
another off behind his back.) Anyway, once she got the taste of it in her mouth you could   
do anything with her. Sometimes he'd stand her on her hands and push her around the room   
that way, like a wheelbarrow. Or else he'd do it dog fashion, and while she 
 
164 
 
groaned and squirmed he'd nonchalantly light a cigarette and blow the smoke between her   
legs. Once he played her a dirty little trick doing it that way. He had worked her up to   
such a state that she was beside herself. Anyway, after he had almost polished the ass off   
her with his back-scuttling he pulled out for a second, as though to cool his cock off, and   
then very slowly and gently he shoved a big long carrot up her twat. "That, Miss   
Abercrombie," he said, "is a sort of Doppelganger to my regular cock," and with that he   
unhitches himself and yanks up his pants. Cousin Abercrombie was so bewildered by it all   
that    she    let    a    tremendous    fart    and    out    tumbled    the    carrot.    At    least,    that's    how    Curley   
related it to me. He was an outrageous liar, to be sure, and there may not be a grain of   
truth in the yam, but there's no denying that he had a flair for such tricks. As for Miss   
Abercrombie and her high-tone Narragansett ways, well, with a cunt like that one can always   
imagine the worst. By comparison Hymie was a purist. Somehow Hymie and his fat circumcised   
dick were two different things. When he got a personal hard-on, as he said, he really meant   
that he was irresponsible. He meant that Nature was asserting itself - through his, Hymie   
Laubscher's fat, circumcised dick. It was the same with his wife's cunt. It was something   
she wore between her legs, like an ornament. It was a part of Mrs. Laubscher but it wasn't   
 109 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mrs. Laubscher personally, if you get what I mean. 
 
Well, all this is simply by way of leading up to the general sexual confusion which   
prevailed at this time. It was like taking a flat in the Land of Fuck. The girl upstairs,   
for instance... she used to come down now and then, when the wife was giving a recital, to   
look after the kid. She was so obviously a simpleton that I didn't give her any notice at   
first. But like all the others she had a cunt too, a sort of impersonal personal cunt which   
she was unconsciously conscious of. The oftener she came down the more conscious she got,   
in her unconscious way. One night, when she was in the bathroom, after she had been in   
there a suspiciously long while, she got me to thinking of things. I decided to take a peep   
through the key-hole and see for myself what was what. Lo and behold, if she isn't standing   
in front of the mirror stroking and petting her little pussy. Almost talking 
 
165 
 
to it, she was. I was so excited I didn't know what to do first. I went back into the big   
room, turned out the lights, and lay there on the couch waiting for her to come out. As I   
lay there I could still see that bushy cunt others and the fingers strumming it like. I   
opened my fly to let my pecker twitch about in the cool of the dark, I tried to mesmerize   
her from the couch, or at least I tried letting my pecker mesmerize her. "Come here, you   
bitch," I kept saying to myself, "come here and spread that cunt over me." She must have   
caught    the    message    immediately,    for    in    a    jiffy    she    had    opened    the    door    and    was    groping   
about in the dark to find the couch. I didn't say a word, I didn't make a move. I just kept   
my mind riveted on her cunt moving quietly in the dark like a crab. Finally she was   
standing beside the couch. She didn't say a word either. She just stood there quietly and   
as I slid my hand up her legs she moved one foot a little to open her crotch a bit more. I   
don't think I ever put my hand into such a juicy crotch in all my life. It was like paste   
running down her legs, and if there had been any billboards handy I could have plastered up   
a dozen or more. After a few moments, just as naturally as a cow lowering its head to   
graze, she bent over and put it in her mouth. I had my whole four fingers inside her,   
whipping it up to a froth. Her mouth was stuffed full and the juice pouring down her legs.   
Not a word out of us, as I say. Just a couple of quiet maniacs working away in the dark   
like gravediggers. It was a fucking Paradise and I knew it, and I was ready and willing to   
fuck my brains away if necessary. She was probably the best fuck I ever had. She never once   
opened her trap - not diat night, nor the next night, nor any night. She'd steal down like   
diat in the dark, soon as she smelted me there alone, and plaster her cunt all over me. It   
was an enormous cunt, too, when I think back on it. A dark, subterranean labyrinth fitted   
up widi divans and cosy comers and rubber teedi and syringeas and soft nestles and   
eiderdown and mulberry leaves. I used to nose in like the solitary worm and bury myself in   
a little cranny where it was absolutely silent, and so soft and restful diat I lay like a   
dolphin on the oyster-banks. A slight twitch and I'd be in the Pullman reading a newspaper   
or else up an impasse where there were mossy round cobblestones 
 
l66 
 110 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and little wicker gates which opened and shut automatically. Sometimes it was like riding   
the shoot-the-shoots, a steep plunge and then a spray of tingling sea-crabs, the bulrushes   
swaying feverishly and the gills of tiny fishes lapping against me like harmonica stops. In   
the immense black grotto there was a silk-and-soap organ playing a predaceous black music.   
When    she    pitched    herself    high,    when    she    turned    the    juice    on    full,    it    made    a    violaceous   
purple, a deep mulberry stain like twilight, a ventiloqual twilight such as dwarfs and   
cretins enjoy when they menstruate. It made me think of cannibals chewing flowers, of   
Bantus running amok, of wild unicorns rutting in rhododendron beds. Everything was   
anonymous    and    unformulated,    John    Doe    and    his    wife    Emmy    Doe:    above    us    the    gas    tanks    and   
below the marine life. Above the belt, as I say, she was batty. Yes, absolutely cuckoo,   
though still abroad and afloat. Perhaps that was what made her cunt so marvellously   
impersonal. It was one cunt out of a million, a regular Pearl of the Antilles, such as Dick   
Osborn discovered when reading Joseph Conrad. In the broad Pacific of sex she lay, a   
gleaming silver reef surrounded with human anemones, human starfish, human madrepores. Only   
an Osborn could have discovered her, given the proper latitude and longitude of cunt.   
Meeting her in the daytime, watching her slowly going daft, it was like trapping a weasel   
when night came on. All I had to do was to lie down in the dark with my fly open and wait.   
She was like Ophelia suddenly resurrected among the Kaffirs. Not a word of any language   
could she remember, especially not English. She was a deaf-mute who had lost her memory,   
and with the loss of memory she had lost her frigidaire, her curling-irons, her tweezers   
and handbag. She was even more naked than a fish, except for the tuft of hair between her   
legs. And she was even slippier than a fish because after all a fish has scales and she had   
none. It was dubious at times whether I was in her or she in me. It was open warfare, the   
new-fangled Pancrace, with each one biting his own ass. Love among the newts and the cut- 
out wide open. Love without gender and without lysol. Incubational love, such as the   
wolverines practise above the tree line. On the one side the Arctic Ocean, on the other the   
Gulf of Mexico. And though 
 
167 
 
we never referred to it openly there was always with us King Kong, King Kong asleep in the   
wrecked hull of the Titanic among the phosphorescent bones of millionaires and lampreys. No   
logic could drive King Kong away. He was the giant truss that supports the soul's fleeting   
anguish. He was the wedding cake with hairy legs and arms a mile long. He was the revolving   
screen on which the news passes away. He was the muzzle of the revolver that never went on,   
the leper armed with sawed-off gonococci. 
 
It was here in the void of hernia that I did all my quiet thinking via the penis. There was   
first of all the binomial theorem, a phrase which had always puzzled me; I put it under the   
magnifying glass and studied it from X to Z, There was Logos, which somehow I had always   
identified with breath; I found that on the contrary it was a sort of obsessional stasis, a   
machine which went on grinding corn long after the granaries had been filled and the Jews   
driven out of Egypt. There was Bucephalus, more fascinating to me perhaps than any word in   
my whole vocabulary: I would trot it out whenever I was in a quandary, and with it of   
 111 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course Alexander and his entire purple retinue. What a horse! Sired in the Indian Ocean,   
the last of the line, and never once mated, except to the Queen of the Amazons during the   
Mesopotamian adventure. There was the Scotch Gambit! An amazing expression which had   
nothing to do with chess. It came to me always in the shape of a man on stilts, page 2498   
of Punk and Wagnall's Unabridged Dictionary. A gambit was a sort of leap in the dark with   
mechanical legs. A leap for no purpose -    hence gambit!    Clear as a bell and perfectly   
simple, once you grasped it. Then there was Andromeda, and the Gorgon M edusa, and Castor   
and Pollux of heavenly origin, mythological twins eternally fixed in the ephemeral   
stardust. There was lucubration, a word distinctly sexual and yet suggesting such cerebral   
connotations as to make me uneasy. Always "midnight lucubrations", the midnight being   
ominously significant. And then arras. Somebody some time or other had been stabbed "behind   
the arras". I saw an altar-cloth made of asbestos and in it was a grievous rent such as   
Caesar himself might have made. 
 
l68 
 
It was very quiet thinking, as I say, the kind that the men of the Old Stone Age must have   
indulged in. Things were neither absurd nor explicable. It was a jig-saw puzzle which, when   
you grew tired of, you could push away with two feet. Anything could be put aside with   
ease, even the Himalaya Mountains. It was just the opposite kind of thinking from   
Mahomet's. It led absolutely nowhere and was hence enjoyable. The grand edifice which you   
might construct throughout the course of a long fuck could be toppled over in the twinkling   
of an eye. It was the fuck that counted and not the construction work. It was like living   
in the Ark during the Flood, everything provided for down to a screw-driver. What need to   
commit murder, rape or incest when all that was demanded of you was to kill time? Rain,   
rain, rain, but inside the Ark everything dry and toasty, a pair of every kind and in the   
larder fine Westphalian hams, fresh eggs, olives, pickled onions, Worcestershire Sauce and   
other delicacies. God had chosen me, Noah, to establish a new heaven and a new earth. He   
had given me a stout boat with all seams caulked and properly dried. He had given me also   
the knowledge to sail the stormy seas. M aybe when it stopped raining there would be other   
kinds of knowledge to acquire, but for the present a nautical knowledge sufficed. The rest   
was chess in the Cafe Royal, Second Avenue, except that I had to imagine a partner, a   
clever Jewish mind that would make the game last until the rains ceased. But, as I said   
before, I had no time to be bored: there were my old friends. Logos, Bucephalus, arras,   
lucubration and so on. Why play chess? 
 
Locked up like that for days and nights on end I began to realize that thinking, when it is   
not masturbative, is lenitive, healing, pleasurable. The thinking that gets you nowhere   
takes you everywhere: all other thinking is done on tracks and no matter how long the   
stretch, in the end there is always the depot or the round-house. In the end there is   
always a red lantern which says STOP! But when the penis gets to thinking there is no stop   
and no let: it is a perpetual holiday, the bait fresh and the fish always nibbling at the   
line. Which reminds me of another cunt, Veronica something or other, who always got me   
thinking the wrong way. With Veronica it was always a tussle in the 
 112 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
169 
 
vestibule. On the dance floor you'd think she was going to make you a permanent present of   
her ovaries, but as soon as she hit the air she'd start thinking, thinking other hat, of   
her purse, of her aunt who was waiting up for her, of the letter she forgot to mail, of the   
job she was going to lose - all kinds of crazy, irrelevant thoughts which had nothing to do   
with the thing in hand. It was like she had suddenly switched her brain to her cunt - the   
most alert and canny cunt imaginable. It was almost a metaphysical cunt, so to speak. It   
was a cunt which thought out problems, and not only that, but a special kind of thinking it   
was, with a metronome going. For this species of displaced rhythmic lucubration a peculiar   
dim light was essential. It had to be just about dark enough for a bat and yet light enough   
to find a button if one happened to come undone and roll on the floor of the vestibule. You   
can see what I mean. A vague yet meticulous precision, a steely awareness that simulated   
absent-mindedness. And fluttery and fluky at the same time, so that you could never   
determine whether it was fish or fowl. What is this I hold in my hand? Fine or super-fine?   
The answer was always duck soup. If you grabbed her by the boobies she would squawk like a   
parrot; if you got under her dress she would wriggle like an eel: if you held her too tight   
she would bite like a ferret. She lingered and lingered and lingered. Why? What was she   
after? Would she give in after an hour or two? Not a chance in a million. She was like a   
pigeon trying to fly with its legs caught in a steel trap. She pretended she had no legs.   
But if you made a move to set her free she would threaten to moult on you. 
 
Because she had such a marvellous ass and because it was also so damned inaccessible I used   
to think of her as the Pons Asinorum. Every schoolboy knows that the Pons Asinorum is not   
to be crossed except by two white donkeys led by a blind man. I don't know why it is so,   
but that's the rule as it was laid down by old Euclid. He was so full of knowledge, the old   
buzzard, that one day -1 suppose purely to amuse himself - he built a bridge which no   
living mortal could ever cross. He called it the Pons Asinorum because he was the owner of   
a pair of beautiful white donkeys, and so attached was he to these don- 
 
170 
 
keys that he would let nobody take possession of them. And so he conjured a dream in which   
he, the blind man, would one day lead the donkeys over the bridge and into the happy   
hunting grounds for donkeys. Well, Veronica was very much in the same boat. She thought so   
much of her beautiful white ass that she wouldn't part with it for anything. She wanted to   
take it with her to Paradise when the time came. As for her cunt, which by the way she   
never referred to it all - as for her cunt, I say, well that was just an accessory to be   
brought along. In the dim light of the vestibule, without ever referring overtly to her two   
problems, she somehow made you uncomfortably aware of them. That is, she made you aware in   
the manner of a prestidigitator. You were to take a look or a feel only to be finally   
deceived, only to be shown that you had not seen and had not felt. It was a very subtle   
sexual algebra, the midnight lucubration which would earn you an A or a B next day, but   
nothing more. You passed your examinations, you got your diploma, and then you were turned   
 113 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loose. In the meantime you used your ass to sit down and your cunt to make water with.   
Between the textbook and the lavatory there was an intermediate zone which you were never   
to enter because it was labelled fuck. You might diddle and piddle, but you must not fuck.   
The light was never completely shut off, the sun never streamed in. Always just light or   
dark enough to distinguish a bat. And just that little eerie flicker of light was what kept   
the mind alert, on the look-out, as it were, for bags, pencils, buttons, keys, et cetera.   
You couldn't really think because your mind was already engaged. The mind was kept in   
readiness, like a vacant seat at the theatre on which the owner had left his opera hat. 
 
Veronica, as I say, had a talking cunt, which was bad because its sole function seemed to   
be to talk one out of a fuck. Evelyn, on the other hand, had a laughing cunt. She lived   
upstairs too, only in another house. She was always trotting in at meal times to tell us a   
new joke. A comedienne of the first water, the only really funny woman I ever met in my   
life. Everything was a joke, fuck included. She could even make a stiff prick laugh, which   
is saying a good deal. They say a stiff prick has no conscience, but a stiff prick that   
laughs too is phenomenal. The 
 
171 
 
only way I can describe it is to say that when she got hot and bothered, Evelyn, she put on   
a ventriloqual act with her cunt. You'd be ready to slip it in when suddenly the dummy   
between her legs would let out a guffaw. At the same time it would reach out for you and   
give you a playful little tug and squeeze. It could sing too, this dummy of a cunt. In fact   
it behaved just like a trained seal. 
 
Nothing is more difficult than to make love in a circus. Putting on the trained seal act   
all the time made her more inaccessible than if she had been trussed up with iron thongs.   
She could break down the most "personal" hard-on in the world. Break it down with laughter.   
At the same time it wasn't quite as humiliating as one might be inclined to imagine. There   
was something sympathetic about this vaginal laughter. The whole world seemed to unroll   
like a pornographic film whose tragic theme is impotence. You could visualize yourself as a   
dog, or a weasel, or a white rabbit. Love was something on the side, a dish of caviar, say,   
or a wax heliotrope. You could see the ventriloquist in you talking about caviar or   
heliotropes, but the real person was always a weasel or a white rabbit. Evelyn was always   
lying in the cabbage patch with her legs spread open offering a bright green leaf to the   
first-comer. But if you made a move to nibble it the cabbage patch would explode with   
laughter, a bright, dewy, vaginal laughter such as Jesus H. Christ and Immanuel Pussyfoot   
Kant never dreamed of, because if they had the world would not be what it is today and   
besides there would have been no Kant and no Christ Almighty. The female seldom laughs, but   
when she does it's volcanic. When the female laughs the male had better scoot to the   
cyclone cellar. Nothing will stand up under that vaginating chortle, not even   
ferroconcrete. The female, when her risibility is once aroused, can laugh down the hyena or   
the jackal or the wild-cat. Now and then one hears it at a lynching bee, for example. It   
means that the lid is off, that everything goes. It means that she will forage for herself-   
 114 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and watch out that you don't get your balls cut off! It means that if the pest is coming   
SHE is coming first, and with huge spiked thongs that will flay the living hide off you. It   
means that she will lay not only with Tom, Dick and Harry, but 
 
172 
 
with Cholera, M eningitis, Leprosy: it means that she will lay herself down on the altar   
like a mare in rut and take on all comers, including the Holy Ghost. It means that what it   
took the poor male, with his logarithmic cunning, five thousand, ten thousand, twenty   
thousand years to build, she will pull it down in a night. She will pull it down and pee on   
it, and nobody will stop her once she starts laughing in earnest. And when I said about   
Veronica that her laugh would break down the most "personal" hard-on imaginable I meant it;   
she would break down the    personal    erection and hand you back an impersonal one that was   
like a red-hot ramrod. You might not get very far with Veronica herself, but with what she   
had to give you could travel far and no mistake about it. Once you came within earshot of   
her it was like you had gotten an overdose of Spanish fly. Nothing on earth could bring it   
down again, unless you put it under a sledge-hammer. 
 
It was going on this way all the time, even though every word I say is a lie. It was a   
personal tour in the impersonal world, a man with a tiny trowel in his hand digging a   
tunnel through the earth to get to the other side. The idea was to tunnel through and find   
at last the Culebra Cut, the nec plus ultra, of the honeymoon of flesh. And of course there   
was no end to the digging. The best I might hope for was to get stuck in the dead centre of   
the earth, where the pressure was strongest and most even all around, and stay stuck there   
forever. That would give me the feeling of Ixion on the wheel, which is one sort of   
salvation and not entirely to be sneezed at. On the other hand I was a metaphysician of the   
instinctivist sort; it was impossible for me to stay stuck anywhere, even in the dead   
centre of the earth. It was most imperative to find and enjoy the metaphysical fuck, and   
for    that I    would be    obliged to    come out    on to    a wholly    new tableland,    a mesa    of sweet   
alfalfa and polished monoliths, where the eagles and the vultures flew at random. 
 
Sometimes sitting in a park of an evening, especially a park littered with papers and bits   
of food, I would see one pass by, one that seemed to be going towards Tibet, and I would   
follow her with the round eye, hoping that suddenly she would begin to fly, for if she did   
that, if she would begin to fly, I knew I 
 
173 
 
would be able to fly also, and that would mean an end to the digging and the wallowing.   
Sometimes, probably because of twilight or other disturbances, it seemed as though she   
actually did fly on rounding a comer. That is, she would suddenly be lifted from the ground   
for the space of a few feet, like a plane too heavily loaded; but just that sudden   
involuntary lift, whether real or imaginary it didn't matter, gave me hope, gave me courage   
to keep the still round eye riveted on the spot. 
 115 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There were megaphones inside which yelled "Go on, keep going, stick it out," and all that   
nonsense. But why? To what end? Whither? Whence? I would set the alarm dock in order to be   
up and about at a certain hour, but why up and about? Why get up at all? With that little   
trowel in my hand I was working like a galley slave and not the slightest hope of reward   
involved. Were I to continue straight on I would dig the deepest hole any man had ever dug.   
On the other hand, if I had truly wanted to get to the other side of the earth, wouldn't it   
have been much simpler to throw away the trowel and just board an aeroplane for China? But   
the body follows after the mind. The simplest thing for the body is not always easy for the   
mind. And when it gels particularly difficult and embarrassing is that moment when the two   
start going in opposite directions. 
 
Labouring with the trowel was bliss; it left the mind completely free and yet there was   
never the slightest danger of the two being separated. If the she-animal suddenly began   
groaning with pleasure, if the she-animal suddenly began to throw a pleasurable conniption   
fit, the jaws moving like old shoe laces, the chest wheezing and the ribs creaking, if the   
she-bugger suddenly started to fall apart on the floor, to the collapse of joy and   
overexasperation, just at the moment, not a second this side or that, the promised   
tableland would hove in sight like a ship coming up out of a fog and there would be nothing   
to do but plant the stars and stripes on it and claim it in the name of Uncle Sam and all   
that's holy. These misadventures happened so frequently that it was impossible not to   
believe in the reality of a realm which was called Fuck, because that was the only name   
which might be given to it, and yet it was more than fuck and by fucking one only began to   
approach it Everybody had at 
 
174 
 
one time or another planted the flag in this territory, and yet nobody was able to lay   
claim to it permanently. It disappeared overnight - sometimes in the twinkling of an eye.   
It was No Man's Land and it stank with the Utter of invisible deaths. If a truce were   
declared you met in this terrain and shook hands or swapped tobacco. But the truces never   
lasted very long. The only thing that seemed to have permanency was the "zone between"   
idea. Here the bullet flew and the corpses piled up: 
 
then it would rain and finally there would be nothing left but a stench. 
 
This is all a figurative way of speaking about what is unmentionable. What is unmentionable   
is pure fuck and pure cunt; it must be mentioned only in    de luxe    editions, otherwise the   
world will fall apart What holds the world together, as I have learned from bitter   
experience, is sexual intercourse. But fuck, the real thing, cunt, the real thing, seems to   
contain some unidentified element which is far more dangerous than nitroglycerine. To get   
an idea of the real thing you must consult a Sears-Roebuck catalogue endorsed by the   
Anglican Church. On page 23 you will find a picture of Priapus juggling a corkscrew on the   
end of his weeny; he is standing in the shadow of the Parthenon by mistake; he is naked   
except for a perforated jock-strap which was loaned for the occasion by the Holy Rollers of   
 116 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oregon and Saskatchewan. Long distance is on the wire demanding to know if they should sell   
short or long. He says    go fuck yourself    and hangs up the receiver. In the background   
Rembrandt is studying the anatomy of our Lord Jesus Christ who, if you remember, was   
crucified by the Jews and then taken to Abysinnia to be pounded with quoits and other   
objects. The weather seems to be fair and warmer, as usual, except for a slight mist rising   
up out of the Ionian; this is the sweat of Neptune's balls which were castrated by the   
early monks, or perhaps it was by the M anicheans in the time of the Pentecostal plague.   
Long strips of horse meat are hanging out to dry and the flies are everywhere, just as   
Homer describes it in ancient times. Hard by is a McCormick threshing machine, a reaper and   
binder with a thirty-six horse-power engine and no cutout. The harvest is in and the   
workers are counting their wages in the 
 
175 
 
distant fields. This is the flush of dawn on the first day of sexual intercourse in the old   
Hellenistic world, now faithfully reproduced for us in colour thanks to the Zeiss Brothers   
and other patient zealots of industry. But this is not the way it looked to the men of   
Homer's time who were on the spot. Nobody knows how the god Priapus looked when he was   
reduced to the ignominy of balancing a corkscrew on the end of his weeny. Standing that way   
in the shadow of the Parthenon he undoubtedly fell a-dreaming of far-off cunt; he must have   
lost consciousness of the corkscrew and the threshing and reaping machine; he must have   
grown very silent within himself and finally he must have lost even the desire to dream. It   
is my idea, and of course I am willing to be corrected if I am wrong, that standing thus in   
the rising mist he suddenly heard the Angelus peal and lo and behold there appeared before   
his very eyes a gorgeous green marshland in which the Chocktaws were making merry with the   
Navajos: in the air above were the white condors, their ruffs festooned with marigolds. He   
saw also a huge slate on which was written the body of Christ, the body of Absalom and the   
evil which is lust. He saw the sponge soaked with frogs' blood, the eyes which Augustine   
had sewn into his skin, the vest which was not big enough to cover out iniquities. He saw   
these things in the whilomst moment when the Navajos were making merry with the Chocktaws   
and he was so taken by surprise that suddenly a voice issued from between his legs, from   
the long thinking reed which he had lost in dreaming, and it was the most inspired, the   
most shrill and piercing, the most jubilant and ferocious cacchinating sort of voice that   
had ever wongled up from the depths. He began to sing through that long cock of his with   
such divine grace and elegance that the white condors came down out of the sky and shat   
huge purple eggs all over the green marshland. Our Lord Christ got up from his stone bed   
and, marked by the quoit though he was, he danced like a mountain goat. The fellaheen came   
out of Egypt in their chains, followed by the warlike Igorotes and the snail-eating men of   
Zanzibar. 
 
This    is    how    things    stood    on    the    first    day    of    sexual    intercourse    in    the    old    Hellenistic   
world. Since then things have changed a 
 
176 
 117 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
great deal. It is no longer polite to sing through your weeny, nor is it permitted even to   
condors to shit purple eggs all over the place. All this is scatological, eschatological   
and ecumenical. It is forbidden.    Verboten.    And so the Land of Puck becomes ever more   
receding; it becomes mythological. Therefore am I constrained to speak mythologically. I   
speak with extreme unction, and with precious unguents too. I put away the clashing   
cymbals, the tubas, the white marigolds, the oleanders and the rhododendrons. Up with the   
thorns and the manacles! Christ is dead and mangled with quoits. The fellaheen are   
bleaching in the sands of Egyptis, their wrists loosely shackled. The vultures have eaten   
away every decomposing crumb of flesh. All is quiet, a million golden mice nibbling at the   
unseen cheese. The moon is up and the Nile ruminates on her riparian ravages. The earth   
belches silently, the stars twitch and bleat, the rivers slip their banks. It's like   
this ... There are cunts which laugh and cunts which talk: there are crazy, hysterical   
cunts shaped like ocarinas and there are planturous, seismographic cunts which register the   
rise and fall of sap: there are cannibalistic cunts which open wide like the jaws of the   
whale and swallow alive: there are also masochistic cunts which dose up like the oyster and   
have hard shells and perhaps a pearl or two inside: there are dithyrambic cunts which dance   
at the very approach of the penis and go wet all over in ecstasy: there are the porcupine   
cunts which unleash their quills and wave little flags at Christmas time: there are   
telegraphic cunts which practise the M orse code and leave the mind full of dots and dashes;   
there are the political cunts which are saturated with ideology and which deny even the   
menopause; there are vegetative cunts which make no response unless you pull them up by the   
roots; there are the religious cunts which smell like Seventh Day Adventists and are full   
of beads, worms, clamshells, sheep droppings and now and then dried breadcrumbs; there are   
the mammalian cunts which are lined with otter skin and hibernate during the long winter:   
there are cruising cunts fitted out like yachts, which are good for solitaries and   
epileptics; there are glacial cunts in which you can drop shooting stars without causing a   
flicker; there are miscellaneous cunts which defy category or description, which you   
stumble 
 
177 
 
on once in a lifetime and which leave you seared and branded; 
 
there are cunts made of pure joy which have neither name nor antecedent and these are the   
best of all, but whither have they flown? 
 
And then there is the one cunt which is all, and this we shall call the super-cunt, since   
it is not of this land at all but of that bright country to which we were long ago invited   
to fly. Here the dew is ever sparkling and the tall reeds bend with the wind. It is here   
that great father of fornication dwells. Father Apis, the mantic bull who gored his way to   
heaven and dethroned the gelded deities of right and wrong. From Apis sprang the race of   
unicorns, that ridiculous beast of ancient writ whose learned brow lengthened into a   
gleaming phallus, and from the unicorn by gradual stages was derived the late-city man of   
which Oswald Spengler speaks. And from the dead cock of this sad specimen arose the giant   
 118 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skyscraper with its express elevators and observation towers. We are the last decimal point   
of sexual calculation; the world turns like a rotten egg in its crate of straw. Now for the   
aluminium wings with which to fly to that far-off place, the bright country where Apis, the   
father of fornication, dwells. Everything goes forward like oiled docks; for each minute of   
the dial there are a million noiseless docks which tick off the rinds of time. We are   
travelling faster than the lightning calculator, faster than starlight, faster than the   
magician can think. Each second is a universe of time. And each universe of time is but a   
wink of sleep in the cosmogony of speed. When speed comes to its end we shall be there,   
punctual as always and blissfully undenominated. We shall shed our wings, our docks and our   
mantelpieces to lean on. We will rise up feathery and jubilant, like a column of blood, and   
there will be no memory to drag us down again. This time I call the realm of the super- 
cunt, for it defies speed, calculation or imagery. Nor has the penis itself a known size or   
weight. There is only the sustained fed of fuck, the fugitive in full flight, the nightmare   
smoking his quiet cigar. Little Nemo walks around with a seven day hard-on and a wonderful   
pair of blue balls bequeathed by Lady Bountiful. It is Sunday morning around the corner   
from Evergreen Cemetery. 
 
178 
 
It is Sunday morning and I am lying blissfully dead to the world on my bed of ferro- 
concrete. Around the comer is the cemetery, which is to say - the    world of sexual   
intercourse.    My balls ache with the fucking that is going on, but it is all going on   
beneath my window, on the boulevard where Hymie keeps his copulating nest. I am thinking of   
one woman and the rest is blotto. I say I am thinking of her, but the truth is I am dying a   
stellar death. I am lying there like a sick star waiting for the light to go out. Years ago   
I lay on this same bed and I waited and waited to be born. Nothing happened. Except that my   
mother, in her Lutheran rage, threw a bucket of water over me. M y mother, poor imbecile   
that she was, thought I was lazy. She didn't know that I had gotten caught in the stellar   
drift, that I was being pulverized to a black extinction out there on the farthest rim of   
the universe. She thought it was sheer laziness that kept me riveted to the bed. She threw   
the bucket of water over me: I squirmed and shivered a bit, but I continued to lie there on   
my ferro-concrete bed. I was immovable. I was a burned-out meteor adrift somewhere in the   
neighbourhood of Vega. 
 
And now I'm on the same bed and the light that's in me refuses to be extinguished. The   
world of men and women are making merry in the cemetery grounds. They are having sexual   
intercourse. God bless them, and I am alone in the Land of Fuck. It seems to me that I hear   
the clanking of a great machine, the linotype bracelets passing through the wringer of sex.   
Hymie and his nymphomaniac of a wife are lying on the same level with me, only they are   
across the river. The river is called Death and it has a bitter taste. I have waded through   
it many times, up to the hips, but somehow I have neither been petrified nor immortalized.   
I am still burning brightly inside, though outwardly dead as a planet. From this bed I have   
gotten up to dance, not once but hundreds, thousands of times. Each time I came away I had   
the conviction that I had danced the skeleton dance on a    terrain vague.    Perhaps I had   
 119 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wasted too much of my substance on suffering; perhaps I had the crazy idea that I would be   
the first metallurgical bloom of the human species; perhaps I was imbued with the notion   
that I was both a sub- 
 
179 
 
gorilla and a super-god. On this bed of ferro-concrete I remember everything and everything   
is in rock crystal. There are never any animals, only thousands and thousands of human   
beings    all    talking    at    once,    and    for    each    word    they    utter    I    have    an    answer    immediately,   
sometimes before the word is out of their mouths. There is plenty of killing, but no blood.   
The murders arc perpetrated with cleanliness, and always in silence. But even if every one   
were killed there would still be conversation, and the conversation would be at once   
intricate and easy to follow. Because it is I who create it! I know it, and that is why it   
never drives me mad. I have conversations which may take place only twenty years hence,   
when I meet the right person, the one whom I shall create, let us say, when the proper time   
comes. All these talks take place in a vacant lot which is attached to my bed like a   
mattress.    Once    I    gave    it    a    name,    this    terrain vague: I    called it Ubiguchi, but somehow   
Ubiguchi never satisfied me, it was too intelligible, too full of meaning. It would be   
better to keep it just "terrain vague", which is what I intend to do. People think that   
vacuity is nothingness, but it is not so. Vacuity is a discordant fulness, a crowded   
ghostly world in which the soul goes reconnoitering. As a boy I remember standing in the   
vacant lot as if I were a very lively soul standing naked in a pair of shoes. The body had   
been stolen from me because I had no particular need of it. I could exist with or without a   
body then. If I killed a little bird and roasted it over the fire and ate it, it was not   
because I was hungry but because I wanted to know about Timbuctoo or Tierra del Fuego. I   
had to stand in the vacant lot and eat dead birds in order to create a desire for that   
bright land which later I would inhabit alone and people with nostalgia. I expected   
ultimate things of this place, but I was deplorably deceived. I went as far as one could go   
in a state of complete deadness, and then by a law, which must be the law of creation, I   
suppose, I suddenly flared up and began to live inexhaustibly, like a star whose light is   
unquenchable. Here began the real cannibalistic excursions which have meant so much to me;   
no more dead chippies picked from the bonfire, but live human meat, tender, succulent human   
flesh, secrets like fresh bloody livers, confidences like swollen tumors that have been   
kept on 
 
180 
 
ice. I learned not to wait for my victim to die, but to eat into him while talking to me.   
Often when I walked away from an unfinished meal I discovered that it was nothing more than   
an old friend minus an arm or a leg. I sometimes left him standing there - a trunk full of   
stinking intestines. 
 
Being of the city, of the only city in the world and no place like Broadway anywhere, I   
used to walk up and down staring at the floodlit hams and other delicacies. I was a   
 
 
 120 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
schizerino from the sole of my boots to the tips of my hair. I lived exclusively in the   
gerundive, which I understood only in Latin. Long before I had read other in the Black Book   
I was cohabiting with Hilda, the giant cauliflower of my dreams. We traversed all the   
morganatic diseases together and a few which were ex cathedra. We dwelt in the carcass of   
the instincts and were nourished by ganglionic memories. There was never    a    universe, but   
millions and billions of universes, all of them put together no bigger than a pinhead. It   
was a vegetal sleep in the wilderness of the mind. It was the past, which alone comprises   
eternity. Amidst the fauna and flora of my dreams I would hear long distance calling.   
Messages were dropped on my table by the deformed and the epileptic. Hans Castorp would   
call sometimes and together we would commit innocent crimes. Or, if it were a bright   
freezing day. I would do a turn in the velodrome with my Presto bike from Chemnitz,   
Bohemia. 
 
Best of all was the skeleton dance. I would first wash all my parts at the sink, change my   
linen, shave, powder, comb my hair, don my dancing pumps. Feeling abnormally light inside   
and out I would wind in and out of the crowd for a time to get the proper human rhythm, the   
weight and substance of flesh. Then I would make a beeline for the dance floor, grab a hunk   
of giddy flesh and begin the autumnal pirouette. It was like that I walked into the hairy   
Greek's place one night and ran smack into her. She seemed blue-black, white as chalk,   
ageless. There was not just the flow to and from, but the endless chute, the voluptuousness   
of intrinsic restlessness. She was mercurial and at the same time of a savoury weight. She   
had the marmoreal stare of a faun embedded in lava. The time has come, I thought, to wander   
back from the periphery. I made 
 
181 
 
a move towards the centre, only to find the ground shifting from under my feet. The earth   
slid rapidly beneath my bewildered feet. I moved again out of the earth belt and behold, my   
hands were full of meteoric flowers. I reached for her with two flaming hands but she was   
more elusive than sand. I thought of my favourite nightmares, but she was unlike anything   
which had made me sweat and gibber. In my delirium I began to prance and neigh. I bought   
frogs and mated them with toads. I thought of the easiest thing to do, which is to die, but   
I did nothing. I stood still and began to petrify at the extremities. That was so   
wonderful, so healing, so eminently sensible, that I began to laugh way down inside the   
viscera, like a hyena crazed with rut. Maybe I would turn into a rosetta stone! I just   
stood still and waited. Spring came and Fall, and then Winter. I renewed my insurance   
policy automatically. I ate grass and the roots of deciduous trees. I sat for days on end   
looking at the same film. Now and then I brushed my teeth. If you fired an automatic at me   
the bullets glanced off and made a queer tat-a-tat ricocheting against the walls. Once up a   
dark street, felled by a thug, I felt a knife go clean through me. It felt like a spritz   
bath. Strange to say, the knife left no holes in my skin. The experience was so novel that   
I went home and stuck knives into all parts of my body. More needle baths. I sat down,   
pulled all the knives out, and again I marvelled that there was no trace of blood, no   
holes, no pain. I was just about to bite into my arm when the telephone rang. It was long   
 121 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distance calling. I never knew who put in the calls because no one ever came to the phone.   
However the skeleton dance ... 
 
Life is drifting by the show-window. I lie there like a flood-lit ham waiting for the axe   
to fall. As a matter of fact, there is nothing to fear, because everything is cut neatly   
into fine little slices and wrapped in cellophane. Suddenly all the lights of the city are   
extinguished and the sirens sound their warning. The city is enveloped in poison gas, bombs   
are bursting, mangled bodies flying through the air. There is electricity everywhere, and   
blood and splinters and loud-speakers. The men in the air are full of glee; those below are   
screaming and 
 
l82 
 
bellowing. When the gas and the flames have eaten all the flesh away the skeleton dance   
begins. I watch from the show-window which is now dark. It is better than the sack of Rome   
because there is more to destroy. 
 
Why do the skeletons dance so ecstatically, I wonder. Is it the fall of the world? Is it   
the dance of death which has been so often heralded? To see millions of skeletons dancing   
in the snow while the city founders is an awesome sight. Will anything ever grow again?   
Will babes come out of the womb? Will there be food and wine? There are the men in the air,   
to be sure. They will come down to plunder. There will be cholera and dysentery and those   
who were above and triumphant will perish like the rest. I have the sure feeling that I   
will be the last man on earth. I will emerge from the show-window when it is all over and   
walk calmly amidst the ruins. I will have the whole earth myself. 
 
Long distance calling! To inform me that I am not utterly alone. Then the destruction was   
not complete? It's discouraging. Man is not even able to destroy himself; he can only   
destroy others. I am disgusted. What a malicious cripple! What cruel delusions! So there   
are more of the species about and they will tidy up the mess and begin again. God will come   
down again in flesh and blood and take up the burden of guilt. They will make music and   
build things in stone and write it all down in little books. Pfui! What blind tenacity,   
what clumsy ambitions! 
 
I am on the bed again. The old Greek world, the dawn of sexual intercourse - and Hymie!   
Hymie Laubscher always on the same level, looking down on the boulevard across the river.   
There is a lull in the nuptial feast and the clam fritters are brought in. Move over just a   
little, he says. There, like that, that's it 11 hear frogs croaking in the swamp outside my   
window. Big cemetery frogs nourished by the dead. They are all huddled together in sexual   
intercourse; they are croaking with sexual glee. 
 
I realize now how Hymie was conceived and brought into being. Hymie the bullfrog! His   
mother was at the bottom of the pack and Hymie, then an embryo, was hidden away in her 
 
 
 
 
 122 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
183 
 
sac. It was in the early days of sexual intercourse and there were no Marquis of Queensbury   
rules to hinder. It was fuck and be fucked - and the devil take the hindmost. It had been   
that way ever since the Greeks - a blind fuck in the mud and then a quick spawn and then   
death. People are fucking on different levels but it's always in a swamp and the litter is   
always destined for the same end. When the house is torn down the bed is left standing: the   
cosmosexual altar. 
 
I was polluting the bed with dreams. Stretched out taut on the ferro-concrete my soul would   
leave its body and roam from place to place on a little trolley such as is used in   
department stores for making change. I made ideological changes and excursions; I was a   
vagabond in the country of the brain. Everything was absolutely clear to me because done in   
rock crystal; at every egress there was written in big letters ANNIHILATION. The fright of   
extinction solidified me; 
 
the body became itself a piece of ferro-concrete. It was ornamented by a permanent erection   
in    the    best    taste.    I    had    achieved    that    state    of    vacuum    so    earnestly    desired    by    certain   
devout members of esoteric cults. I was no more. 
 
It was about this time, adopting the pseudonym Samson Lackawanna, that I began my   
depredations. The criminal instinct in me had gotten the upper hand. Whereas heretofore I   
had been only an errant soul, a sort of Gentile Dybbuk, now I became a flesh-filled ghost.   
I had taken the name which pleased me and I had only to act instinctively. In Hong Kong,   
for instance, I made my entry as a book-agent. I carried a leather purse filled with   
Mexican dollars and I visited religiously all those Chinese who were in need of further   
education. At the hotel I rang for women like you would ring for whiskey and soda. Morning   
I    studied    Tibetan    in    order    to    prepare    for    the    journey    to    Lhasa.    I    already    spoke    Jewish   
fluently, and Hebrew too. I could count two rows of figures at once. It was so easy to   
swindle the Chinese that I went back to Manila in disgust. There I took a M r. Rico in hand   
and taught him the art of selling books with no handling charges. All the profit came from   
ocean freight rates, but it was sufficient 
 
184 
 
to keep me in luxury while it lasted. 
 
The breath had become as much a trick as breathing. Things were not dual merely, but   
multiple. I had become a cage of mirrors reflecting vacuity. But vacuity once stoutly   
posited I was at home and what is called creation was merely a job of filling up holes. The   
trolley conveniently carried me about from place to place and in each little side pocket of   
the great vacuum I dropped a ton of poems to wipe out the idea of annihilation. I had ever   
before me boundless vistas. I began to live in the vista, like a microscopic speck on the   
lens of a giant telescope. There was no night in which to rest. It was perpetual starlight   
I was not even a personal hard-on. 
 
 
 123 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
on the arid surface of dead planets. Now and then a lake black as marble in which I saw   
myself walking amidst brilliant orbs of lights. So low hung the stars and so dazzling was   
the light they shed, that it seemed as if the universe were only about to be born. What   
rendered the impression stronger was that I was alone; not only were there no animals, no   
trees, no other beings, but there was not even a blade of grass, not even a dead root. In   
that violet incandescent light witihout even the suggestion of a shadow motion itself   
seemed to be absent. It was like a blaze of pure consciousness, thought become God. And   
God, for the first time in my knowledge, was dean-shaven. I was also clean-shaven,   
flawless, deadly accurate. I saw my image in the marble black lakes and it was diapered   
with stars. Stars, stars... like a clout between the eyes and all remembrance fast run out.   
I    was Samson    and I    was Lackawanna    and I    was dying    as one    being in    the ecstasy    of full   
consciousness. 
 
And now here I am, sailing down the river in my little canoe. Anything you would like to   
have me do I will do for you - gratis. This is the Land of Fuck, in which there are no   
animals, no trees, no stars, no problems. Here the spermatazoon reigns supreme. Nothing is   
determined in advance, the future is absolutely uncertain, the past is non-existent. For   
every million born 999,999 are doomed to die and never again be born. But the one that   
makes a home run is assured of life eternal. Life is squeezed into a seed, which is a soul.   
Everything has soul, including minerals, plants, lakes, mountains, 
 
185 
 
rocks. Everything is sentient, even at the lowest stage of consciousness. 
 
Once this fact is grasped there can be no more despair. At the very bottom of the ladder,   
chez the spermatozoa, there is the same condition of bliss as at the top, chez God. God is   
the summation of all the spermatozoa come to full consciousness. Between the bottom and the   
top there is no stop, no halfway station. The river starts somewhere in the mountains and   
flows on into the sea. On this river that leads to God the canoe is as serviceable as the   
dreadnought. From the very start the journey is homeward. 
 
Sailing down the river... Slow as the hook-worm, but tiny enough to make every bend. And   
slippery as an eel withal. What is your name? shouts some one.    My name? Why just call me   
God - God the embryo, I go sailing on. Somebody would like to buy me a hat. What size do   
you wear, imbecile! he shouts. What size? Why size X! (And why do they always shout at me?   
Am I supposed to be deaf?) The hat is lost at the next cataract.    Tant pis - for the hat.   
Does God need a hat? God needs only to become God, more and more God. All this voyaging,   
all these pitfalls, the time that passes, the scenery, and against the scenery man,   
trillions and trillions of things called man, like mustard seeds. Even in embryo God has no   
memory. The backdrop of consciousness is made up of infinitesimally minute ganglia, a coat   
of hair soft as wool. The mountain goat stands alone amidst the Himalayas; he doesn't   
question how he got to the summit. He grazes quietly amidst the decor; when the time comes   
he will travel down again. He keeps his muzzle to the ground, grubbing for the sparse   
 124 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nourishment which the mountain peaks afford. In this strange capricornian condition of   
embryosis God the he-goat ruminates in stolid bliss among the mountain peaks. The high   
altitudes nourish the germ of separation which will one day estrange him completely from   
the soul of man, which will make him a desolate, rock-like father dwelling forever apart in   
a void which is unthinkable. But first come the morganatic diseases, of which we must now   
speak... 
 
There is a condition of misery which is irremediable - 
 
l86 
 
because its origin is lost in obscurity. Bloomingdale's, for example, can bring about this   
condition. All department stores are symbols of sickness and emptiness, but Bloomingdale's   
is my special sickness, my incurable obscure malady. In the chaos of Bloomingdale's there   
is an order, but this order is absolutely crazy to me, it is the order which I would find   
on the    head of    a pin    if I    were to    put it    under the    microscope. It    is the    order of    an   
accidental series of accidents accidentally conceived. This order has, above all, an odour   
- and it is the odour of Bloomingdale's which strikes terror into my heart. In   
Bloomingdale's I fall apart completely: I dribble on to the floor, a helpless mess of guts   
and bones and cartilage. There is the smell, not of decomposition, but of mis-alliance.   
Man, the miserable alchemist, has welded together in a million forms and shapes, substances   
and essences which have nothing in common. Because in his mind there is a tumor which is   
eating him away insatiably; he has left the little canoe which was taking him blissfully   
down the river in order to construct a bigger, safer boat in which there may be room for   
every one. His labours take him so far afield that he has lost all remembrance of why he   
left the little canoe. The ark is so full of bric-a-brac that it has become a stationary   
building above a subway in which the smell of linoleum prevails and predominates. Gather   
together all the significance hidden away in the interstital miscellany of Bloomingdale's   
and put it on the head of a pin and you will have left a universe in which the grand   
constellations move without the slightest danger of collision. It is this microscopic chaos   
which brings on my morganatic ailments. In the street I begin to stab horses at random, or   
I lift a skirt here and there looking for a letter-box, or I put a postage stamp across a   
mouth, an eye, a vagina. Or I suddenly decide to climb a tall building, like a fly, and   
once having reached the roof I do fly with real wings and I fly and fly and fly, covering   
towns like Weehawken, Hoboken, Hackensack, Canarsie, Bergen Beach in the twinkling of an   
eye. Once you become a real schizerino flying is the easiest thing in the world; the trick   
is    to    fly    with    the    etheric    body,    to    leave    behind    in    Bloomingdale's    your    sack    of    bones,   
guts, 
 
187 
 
blood and cartilage; to fly only with your immutable self which, if you stop a moment to   
reflect, is always equipped with wings. Flying this way, in full daylight, has advantages   
over the ordinary night-flying which everybody indulges in. You can leave off from moment   
 125 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to moment, as quick and decisive as stepping on a brake; there is no difficulty in finding   
your other self, because the moment you leave off, you    are    your other self, which is to   
say, the so-called whole self. Only, as the Blooming-dale experience goes to prove, this   
whole self, about which so much boasting has been done, falls apart very easily. The smell   
of linoleum, for some strange reason, will always make me fall apart and collapse on the   
floor. It is the smell of all the unnatural things which were glued together in me, which   
were assembled, so to say, by negative consent. 
 
It is only after the third meal that the morning gifts, bequeathed by the phony alliances   
of the ancestors, begin to drop away and the true rock of the self, the happy rock sheers   
up out of the muck of the soul. With nightfall the pinhead universe begins to expand. It   
expands organically, from an infinitesimal nuclear speck, in the way that minerals or star- 
dusters form. It eats into the surrounding chaos like a rat boring through store cheese.   
All chaos could be gathered together on a pinhead, but the self, microscopical at the   
start, works up to a universe from any point in space. This is not the self about which   
books are written, but the ageless self whith has been fanned out through millenary ages to   
men with names and dates, the self which begins and ends as a worm, which    is    the worm in   
the cheese called the world. Just as the slightest breeze can set a vast forest in motion   
so, by some unfathomable impulse from within, the rock-like self can begin to grow, and in   
this growth nothing can prevail against it. It's like Jack Frost at work, and the whole   
world a window-pane. No hint of labour, no sound, no struggle, no rest; 
 
relentless, remorseless, unremitting, the growth of the self goes on. Only two items on the   
bill of fare: the self and the not-self. And an eternity in which to work it out. In this   
eternity, which has nothing to do with time or space, there are interludes in which   
something like a thaw sets in. The form 
 
l88 
 
of the self breaks down, but the self, like climate, remains. In the night the amorphous   
matter of the self assumes the most fugitive forms: error seeps in through the portholes   
and the wanderer is unlatched from his door. This door which the body wears, if opened out   
on to the world, leads to annihilation. It is the door in every fable out of which the   
magician steps; nobody has ever read of him returning home through the selfsame door. If   
opened inward there are infinite doors, all resembling trapdoors: no horizons are visible,   
no airlines, no rivers, no maps, no tickets. Each couche is a halt for the night only, be   
it five minutes or ten thousand years. The doors have no handles and they never wear out.   
Most important to note - there is no end in sight. All these halts for the night, so to   
speak, are like abortive explorations of a myth. One can feel his way about, take bearings,   
observe passing phenomena; one can even feel at home. But there is no taking root. Just at   
the moment when one begins to feel "established" the whole terrain founders, the soil   
underfoot is afloat, the constellations are shaken loose from their moorings, the whole   
known universe, including the imperishable self, starts moving silently, ominously,   
shudderingly serene and unconcerned, towards an unknown, unseen destination. All the doors   
 126 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seem to be opening at once; the pressure is so great that an implosion occurs and in the   
swift plunge the skeleton bursts asunder. It was some such gigantic collapse which Dante   
must have experienced when he situated himself in Hell; it was not a bottom which he   
touched,    but    a    core,    a    dead    centre    from    which    time    itself    is    reckoned.    Here    the    comedy   
begins, for here it is seen to be divine. 
 
All this by way of saying that in going through the revolving door of the Amarillo dance   
hall one night some twelve or fourteen years ago, the great event took place. The interlude   
which I think of as the Land of Fuck, a realm of time more than of space, is for me the   
equivalent of that Purgatory which Dante has described in nice detail. As I put my hand on   
the brass rail of the revolving door to leave the Amarillo Dance Hall, all that I had   
previously been, was, and about to be, foundered. There was nothing unreal about it; the   
very time 
 
189 
 
in which I was born passed away, carried off by a mightier stream. Just as I had previously   
been bundled out of the womb, so now I was shunted back to some timeless vector where the   
process of growth is kept in abeyance. I passed into the world of effects. There was no   
fear, only a feeling of fatality. My spine was socketed to the node; I was up against the   
coccyx of an implacable new world. In the plunge the skeleton blew apart, leaving the   
immutable ego as helpless as a squashed louse. 
 
If from this point I do not begin, it is because there is no beginning. If I do not fly at   
once to the bright land it is because wings are of no avail. It is zero hour and the moon   
is at nadir... 
 
Why I think of Maxie Schnadig I don't know, unless it is because of Dostoievski. The night   
I sat down to read Dostoievski for the first time was a most important event in my life,   
even more important than my first love. It was the first deliberate, conscious act which   
had significance for me; it changed the whole face of the world. Whether it is true that   
the clock stopped that moment when I looked up after the first deep gulp I don't know any   
more. But the world stopped dead for a moment, that I know. It was my first glimpse into   
the soul of a man, or shall I say simply that Dostoievski was the first man to reveal his   
soul to me? M aybe I have been a bit queer before that, without realizing it, but from the   
moment that I dipped into Dostoievski I was definitely, irrevocably, contentedly queer. The   
ordinary waking, work-a-day world was finished for me. Any ambition of desire I had to   
write was also killed - for a long time to come. I was like those men who have been too   
long in the trenches, too long under fire. Ordinary human suffering, ordinary human   
jealousy, ordinary human ambitions - it was just so much shit to me. 
 
I can visualize best my condition when I think of my relations with M axie and his sister   
Rita. At the time Maxie and I were both interested in sport. We used to go swimming   
together a great deal, that I remember well. Often we passed the whole day and night at the   
 
 
 127 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
beach. I had only met Maxie's sister once or twice; whenever I brought up her name M axie   
would rather frantically begin to talk about something else. 
 
190 
 
That annoyed me because I was really bored to death with M axie's company, tolerating him   
only because he loaned me money readily and bought me things which I needed. Every time we   
started for the beach I was in hopes his sister would turn up unexpectedly. But no, he   
always managed to keep her out of reach. Well, one day as we were undressing in the bath   
house and he was showing me what a fine tight scrotum he had, I said to him right out of   
the blue - "listen, M axie, that's all right about your nuts, they're fine and dandy, and   
there's nothing to worry about but where in hell is Rita all the time, why don't you bring   
her along some time and let me take a good look at her quim... yes, quim, you know what I   
mean." M axie, being a Jew from Odessa, had never heard the word quim before. He was deeply   
shocked by my words and yet at the same time intrigued by this new word. In a sort of daze   
he said to me - "Jesus, Henry, you oughtn't to say a thing like that to me!" "Why not?" I   
answered. "She's got a cunt, your sister, hasn't she?" I was about to add something else   
when he broke into a terrific fit of laughter. That saved the situation, for the time   
being. But Maxie didn't like the idea at all deep down. All day long it bothered him,   
though he never referred to our conversation again. No, he was very silent that day. The   
only form of revenge he could think of was to urge me to swim far beyond the safety zone in   
the hope of tiring me out and letting me drown. I could see so clearly what was in his mind   
that I was possessed with the strength of ten men. Damned if I would go drown myself just   
because his sister like all other women happened to have a cunt. 
 
It was at Far Rockaway where this took place. After we had dressed and eaten a meal I   
suddenly decided that I wanted to be alone and so, very abruptly, at the comer of a street.   
I shook hands and said good-bye. And there I was! Almost instantaneously I felt alone in   
the world, alone as one feels only in moments of extreme anguish. I think I was picking my   
teeth absentmindedly when this wave of loneliness hit me full on, like a tornado. I stood   
there on the street comer and sort of felt myself all over to see if I had been hit by   
something. It was inexplicable, and at the same time it was very wonderful, 
 
191 
 
very exhilarating, like a double tonic, I might say. When I say that I was at Far Rockaway   
I mean that I was standing at the end of the earth, at a place called Xanthos, if there be   
such a place, and surely there ought to be a word like this to express no place at all. If   
Rita had come along then I don't think I would have recognized her. I had become an   
absolute stranger standing in the very midst of my own people. They looked crazy to me, my   
people, with their newly sunbumed faces and their flannel trousers and their dock-work   
stockings. They had been bathing like myself because it was a pleasant, healthy recreation   
and now like myself they were full of sun and food and a little heavy with fatigue. Up   
until this loneliness hit me I too was a bit weary, but suddenly, standing there completely   
 128 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shut off from the world, I woke up with a start I became so electrified that I didn't dare   
move for fear I would charge like a bull or start to climb the wall of a building or else   
dance and scream. Suddenly I realized that all this was because I was really a brother to   
Dostoievski, that perhaps I was the only man in all America who knew what he meant in   
writing those books. Not only that, but I felt all the books I would one day write myself   
germinating inside me: they were bursting inside like ripe cocoons. And since up to this   
time I had written nothing but fiendishly long letters about everything and nothing, it was   
difficult for me to realize that there must come a time when I should begin, when I should   
put down the first word, the first-real word. And this time was now! That was what dawned   
on me. 
 
I used the word Xanthos a moment ago. I don't know whether there is a Xanthos or not, and I   
really don't care one way or another, but there must be a place in the world, perhaps in   
the Grecian islands, where you come to the end of the known world and you are thoroughly   
alone and yet you are not frightened of it but rejoice, because at this dropping off place   
you can feel the old ancestral world which is eternally young and new and fecundating. You   
stand there, wherever the place is, like a newly hatched chick beside its eggshell. This   
place is Xanthos, or as it happened in my case. Far Rockaway. 
 
There I was! It grew dark, a wind came up, the streets 
 
192 
 
became deserted, and finally it began to pour cats and dogs. Jesus, that finished me! When   
the rain came down, and I got it smack in the face staring at the sky, I suddenly began to   
bellow with joy. I laughed and laughed and laughed, exactly like an insane man. Nor did I   
know what I was laughing about. I wasn't thinking of a thing. I was just overwhelmed with   
joy, just crazy with delight in finding myself absolutely alone. If then and there a nice   
juicy quim had been handed me on a platter, if all the quims in the world had been afforded   
me for to make my choice, I wouldn't have batted an eyelash. I had what no quim could give   
me. And just about at that point, thoroughly drenched but still exultant, I thought of the   
most irrelevant thing in the world -    carfare!    Jesus, the bastard Maxie had walked off   
without leaving me a sou. There I was with my fine budding antique world and not a penny in   
my    jeans.    Herr    Dostoievski    Junior    had    now    to    begin    to    walk    here    and    there    peering    into   
friendly and un-friendly faces to see if he could pry loose a dime. He walked from one end   
of Far Rockaway to the other but nobody seemed to give a fuck about handing out carfare in   
the rain. Walking about in that heavy animal stupor which comes with begging I got to   
thinking of Maxie the window-trimmer and how the first time I spied him he was standing in   
the show-window dressing a mannikin. And from that in a few minutes to Dostoievski, then   
the world stopped dead, and then, like a great rose bush opening in the night, his sister   
Rita's warm, velvety flesh. 
 
Now this what is rather strange ... A few minutes after I thought of Rita, her private and   
extraordinary quim, I was in the train bound for New York and dozing off with a marvellous   
 
 
 129 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
languid erection. And stranger still, when I got out of the train, when I had walked but a   
block or two from the station, whom should I bump into rounding a comer but Rita herself.   
And as though she had been informed telepathically of what was going on in my brain, Rita   
too was hot under the whiskers. Soon we were sitting in a chop suey joint, seated side by   
side in a little booth, behaving exactly like a pair of rabbits in rut. On the dance floor   
we hardly moved. We were wedged in tight and we stayed that way, letting them jog and   
jostle us 
 
193 
 
about as they might. I could have taken her home to my place, as I was alone at the time,   
but no, I had a notion to bring her back to her own home, stand her up in the vestibule and   
give her a fuck right under Maxie's nose - which I did. In the midst of it I thought again   
of the mannikin in the show window and of the way he had laughed that afternoon when I let   
drop the word quim. I was on the point of laughing aloud when suddenly I felt that she was   
coming, one of those long drawn-out orgasms such as you get now and then in a Jewish cunt.   
I had my hands under her buttocks, the tips of my fingers just inside her cunt, in the   
lining, as it were; as she began to shudder I lifted her from the ground and raised her   
gently up and down on the end of my cock. I thought she would go off her nut completely,   
the way she began to carry on. She must have had four or five orgasms like that in the air,   
before I put her feet down on the ground. I took it out without spilling a drop and made   
her lie down in the vestibule. Her hat had rolled off into a corner and her bag had spilled   
open and a few coins had tumbled out. I note this because just before I gave it to her good   
and proper I made a mental note to pocket a few coins for my carfare home. Anyway, it was   
only a few hours since I had said to M axie in the bath house that I would like to take a   
look at his sister's quim, and here it was now smack, up against me, sopping wet and   
throwing out one squirt after another. If she had been fucked before she had never been   
fucked properly, that's a cinch. And I myself was never in such a fine cool collected   
scientific frame of mind as now lying on the floor of the vestibule right under Maxie's   
nose, pumping it into the private, sacred, and extraordinary quim of his sister Rita. I   
could have held it in indefinitely - it was incredible how detached I was and yet   
thoroughly aware of every quiver and jolt she made. But somebody had to pay for making me   
walk around in the rain grubbing a dime. Somebody had to pay for the ecstasy produced by   
the germination of all those unwritten books inside me. Somebody had to verify the   
authenticity of this private, concealed cunt which had been plaguing me for weeks and   
months. Who better qualified than I? I thought so hard and fast between orgasms  
 
194 
 
that my cock must have grown another inch or two. Finally I decided to make an end of it by   
turning her over and back-scuttling her. She balked a bit at first, but when she felt the   
thing slipping out of her she nearly went crazy. "Oh yes, oh yes, do it, do it!" she   
gibbered, and with that I really got excited, I had hardly slipped it into her when I felt   
it coming, one of those long agonizing spurts from the tip of the spinal column. I shoved   
 130 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it in so deep that I felt as if something had given way. We fell over, exhausted, the both   
of us, and panted like dogs. At the same time, however, I had the presence of mind to feel   
around for a few coins. Not that it was necessary, because she had already loaned me a few   
dollars, but to make up for the carfare which I was lacking in Far Rockaway. Even then, by   
Jesus, it Wasn't finished. Soon I felt her groping about, first with her hands, then with   
her mouth. I had still a sort of semi hard-on. She got it into her mouth and she began to   
caress it with her tongue. I saw stars. The next thing I knew her feet were around my neck   
and my tongue up her twat. And then I had to get over her again and shove it in, up to the   
hilt. She squirmed around like an eel, so help me God. And then she began to come again,   
long, drawn-out, agonizing orgasms, with a whimpering and gibbering that was hallucinating.   
Finally I had to pull it out and tell her to stop. What a quim! And I had only asked to   
take a look at it! 
 
Maxie with his talk of Odessa revived something which I had lost as a child. Though I had   
never a very dear picture of Odessa the aura of it was like the little neighbourhood in   
Brooklyn which meant so much to me and from which I had been torn away too soon. I get a   
very definite feeling of it every time I see an Italian painting without perspective: if it   
is a picture of a funeral procession, for example, it is exactly the sort of experience   
which I knew as a child, one of intense immediacy. If it is a picture of the open street,   
the women sitting in the windows are sitting on the street and not above it and away from   
it. Everything that happens is known immediately by everybody, just as among primitive   
people. Murder is in the air, chance rules. 
 
Just as in the Italian primitives this perspective is lacking, so  
 
195 
 
in the little old neighbourhood from which I was uprooted as a child there were these   
parallel vertical planes on which everything took place and through which, from layer to   
layer, everything was communicated, as if by osmosis. The frontiers were sharp, dearly   
defined, but they were not impassable. I lived then, as a boy, dose to the boundary between   
the north and the south side. I was just a little bit over on the north side, just a few   
steps from a broad thoroughfare called North Second Street, which was for me the real   
boundary line between the north and the south side. The actual boundary was Grand Street,   
which led to Broadway Ferry, but this street meant nothing to me, except that it was   
already beginning to be filled with Jews. No, North Second Street was the mystery street,   
the frontier between two worlds. I was living, therefore, between two boundaries, the one   
real, the other imaginary - as I have lived all my life. There was a little street, just a   
block long which lay between Grand Street and North Second Street, called Fillmore Place.   
This little street was obliquely opposite the house my grandfather owned and in which we   
lived. It was the most enchanting street I have ever seen in all my life. It was the ideal   
street - for a boy, a lover, a maniac, a drunkard, a crook, a lecher, a thug, an   
astronomer, a musician, a poet, a tailor, a shoemaker, a politician. In fact this was just   
the sort of street it was, containing just such representatives of the human race, each one   
 131 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a world unto himself and all living together harmoniously and inharmoniously, but together,   
a solid corporation, a dose-knit human spore which could not disintegrate unless the street   
itself disintegrated. 
 
So it seemed, at least. Until the Williamsburg Bridge was opened, whereupon there followed   
the invasion of the Jews from Delancey Street, New York. This brought about the   
disintegration of our little world, of the little street called Fillmore Place, which like   
the name itself was a street of value, of dignity, of light, of surprises. The Jews came,   
as I say, and like moths they began to eat into the fabric of our lives until there was   
nothing left by this moth-like presence which they brought with them everywhere. Soon the   
street began to smell bad, soon the real people moved away, soon the houses 
 
196 
 
began to deteriorate and even the stoops fell away, like the paint. Soon the street looked   
like a dirty mouth with all the prominent teeth missing, with ugly charred stumps gaping   
here and there, the lips rotting, the palate gone. Soon the garbage was knee deep in the   
gutter and the fire escapes filled with bloated bedding, with cockroaches, with dried   
blood. Soon the Kosher sign appeared on the shop windows and there was poultry everywhere   
and lax and sour pickles and enormous loaves of bread. Soon there were baby-carriages in   
every areaway and on the stoops and in the little yards and before the shop fronts. And   
with the change the English language also disappeared; one heard nothing but Yiddish,   
nothing but this sputtering, choking, hissing tongue in which God and rotten vegetables   
sound alike and mean alike. 
 
We were among the first families to move away, following the invasion. Two or three times a   
year I came back to the old neighbourhood, for a birthday or for Christmas or Thanksgiving.   
With each visit I marked the loss of something I had loved and cherished. It was like a bad   
dream. It got worse and worse. The house in which my relatives still lived was like an old   
fortress going to ruin; they were stranded in one of the wings of the fortress, maintaining   
a forlorn, island life, beginning themselves to look sheepish, hunted, degraded. They even   
began to make distinctions between their Jewish neighbours, finding some of them quite   
human, quite decent, dean, kind, sympathetic, charitable, etc. etc. To me it was   
heartrending. I could have taken a machine gun and mowed the whole neighbourhood down, Jew   
and Gentile together. 
 
It was about the time of the invasion that the authorities decided to change the name of   
North Second Street to Metropolitan Avenue. This highway, which to the Gentiles had been   
the road to the cemeteries, now became what is called an artery of traffic, a link between   
two ghettoes. On the New York side the riverfront was rapidly being transformed owing to   
the erection of the skyscrapers. On our side, the Brooklyn side, the warehouses were piling   
up and the approaches to the various new bridges created plazas, comfort stations, pool   
rooms, stationery shops, ice cream parlours, restaurants, 
 
 
 
 
 132 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
197 
 
clothing stores, hock shops, etc. In short everything was becoming    metropolitan,    in the   
odious sense of the word. 
 
As long as we lived in the old neighbourhood we never referred to M etropolitan Avenue: it   
was always North Second Street, despite the official change of name. Perhaps it was eight   
or ten years later, when I stood one winter's day at the corner of the street facing the   
river and noticed for the first time the great tower of the Metropolitan Life Insurance   
Building, that I realized that North Second Street was no more. The imaginary boundary of   
my world had changed. My lance travelled now far beyond the cemeteries, far beyond the   
rivers, far beyond the city of New York or the State of New York, beyond the whole United   
States indeed. At Point Loma, California, I had looked out upon the broad Pacific and I had   
felt something there which kept my face permanently screwed in another direction. I came   
back to the old neighbourhood, I remember, one night with my old friend Stanley who had   
just come out of the army, and we walked the streets sadly and wistfully. A European can   
scarcely know what this feeling is like. Even when a town becomes modernized, in Europe,   
there are still vestiges of the old. In America, though there are vestiges, they are   
effaced, wiped out of the consciousness, trampled upon, obliterated, nullified by the new.   
The new is, from day to day, a moth which eats into the fabric of life, leaving nothing   
finally but a great hole. Stanley and I, we were walking through this terrifying hole. Even   
a war does not bring this kind of desolation and destruction. Through war a town may be   
reduced to ashes and the entire population wiped out, but what springs up again resembles   
the old. Death is fecundating, for the soil as well as for the spirit. In America the   
destruction is completely annihilating. There is no rebirth only a cancerous growth, layer   
upon layer of new, poisonous tissue, each one uglier than the previous one. 
 
We were walking through this enormous hole, as I say, and it was a winter's night, dear,   
frosty, sparkling, and as we came through the south side towards the boundary line we   
saluted all the old relics or the spots where things had once stood and where there had   
been once something of ourselves. And as we 
 
198 
 
approached North Second Street, between Fillmore Place and North Second Street - a distance   
of only a few yards and yet such a rich, full area of the globe - before Mrs. O'M elio's   
shanty I stopped and looked up at the house where I had known what it was to really have a   
being. Everything had shrunk now to diminutive proportions, including the world which lay   
beyond the boundary line, the world which had been so mysterious to me and so terrifyingly   
grand, so delimited. Standing there in a trance I suddenly recalled a dream which I have   
had over and over, which I still dream now and then, and which I hope to dream as long as I   
live. It was the dream of passing the boundary line. As in all dreams the remarkable thing   
is the vividness of the reality, the fad that    one is in reality    and not dreaming. Across   
the line I am unknown and absolutely alone. Even the language has changed. In fact, I am   
 133 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
Creative 
 
 
 
 
always regarded as a stranger, a foreigner. I have unlimited time on my hands and I am   
absolutely content in sauntering through the streets. There is only one street, I must say   
- the continuation of the street on which I lived. I come finally to an iron bridge over   
the railroad yards. It is always nightfall when I reach the bridge, though it is only a   
short distance from the boundary line. Here I look down upon the webbed tracks, the freight   
stations, the tenders, the storage sheds, and as I gaze down upon this duster of strange   
moving substances a process of metamorphosis takes place,    just as    in a    dream.    With the   
transformation and deformation I become aware that this is the old dream which I have   
dreamed so often. I have a wild fear that I shall wake up, and indeed I know that I will   
wake up shortly, just at the moment when in the midst of a great open space I am about to   
walk into the house which contains something of the greatest importance for me. Just as I   
go towards this house the lot on which I am standing begins to grow vague  at the edges, to   
dissolve, to vanish. Space rolls in on me like a carpet and swallows me up, and with it of   
course the house which I never succeed in entering. 
 
There is absolutely no transition from this, the most pleasurable dream I know to the heart   
of a book called 
 
199 
 
Evolution. In this book by Henri Bergson, which I came to as naturally as to the dream of   
the land beyond the boundary, I am again quite alone, again a foreigner, again a man of   
indeterminate age standing on an iron bridge observing a peculiar metamorphosis without and   
within. If this book had not fallen into my hands at the precise moment it did, perhaps I   
would have gone mad. It came at a moment when another huge world was crumbling on my hands.   
If I had never understood a thing which was written in this book, if I had preserved only   
the memory of one word, creative, it is quite sufficient. This word was my talisman. With   
it I was able to defy the whole world, and especially my friends. 
 
There are times when one must break with one's friends in order to understand the meaning   
of friendship. It may seem strange to say so, but the discovery of this book was equivalent   
to the discovery of a weapon, an implement, wherewith I might lop off all the friends who   
surrounded me and who no longer meant anything to me. This book became my friend because it   
taught me that I had no need of friends. It gave me the courage to stand alone, and it   
enabled me to appreciate loneliness. I have never understood the book; at times I thought I   
was on the point of understanding, but I never really did understand. It was more important   
for me not to understand. With this book in my hands, reading aloud to my friends,   
questioning them, explaining to them, I was made clearly to understand that I had no   
friends, that I was alone in the world. Because in not understanding the meaning of the   
words, neither I nor my friends, one thing became very clear and that was that there were   
ways of not understanding and that the difference between the non-understanding of one   
individual and the non-understanding of another created a world of terra firma even more   
solid than differences of understanding. Everything which before I thought I had understood   
crumbled, and I was left with a dean slate. My friends, on the other hand, entrenched   
 134 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves more solidly in the little ditch of understanding which they had dug for   
themselves. They died comfortably in their little bed of understanding, to become useful   
citizens of the world. I pitied them, and in short order. 
 
200 
 
I deserted them one by one, without the slightest regret. 
 
What was there then in this book which could mean so much to me and yet remain obscure? I   
come back to the word creative. 1 am sure that the whole mystery lies in the realization of   
the meaning of this word. When I think of the book now, and the way I approached it, I   
think of a man going through the rites of initiation. The disorientation and reorientation   
which comes with the initiation into any mystery is the most wonderful experience which it   
is possible to have. Everything which the brain has laboured for a lifetime to assimilate,   
categorize and synthesize has to be taken apart and reordered. M oving day for the soul! And   
of course it's not for a day, but for weeks and months that this goes on. You meet a friend   
on the street by chance, one whom you haven't seen for several weeks, and he has become an   
absolute stranger to you. You give him a few signals from your new perch and if he doesn't   
cotton you pass him up -    for good.    It's exactly like mopping up a battlefield: all those   
who are hopelessly disabled and agonizing you dispatch with one swift blow of your dub. You   
move on, to new fields of battle, to new triumphs or defeats. But you move! And as yon move   
the world moves with you, with terrifying exactitude. You seek out new fields of operation,   
new specimens of the human race whom you patiently instruct and equip with the new symbols.   
You choose sometimes those you would never have looked at before. You try everybody and   
everything within range, provided they are ignorant of the revelation. 
 
It was in this fashion that I found myself sitting in the busheling room of my father's   
establishment, reading aloud to the Jews who were working there. Reading to them from this   
new Bible in the way that Paul must have talked to the disciples. With the added   
disadvantage, to be sure, that these poor Jew bastards could not read the English language.   
Primarily I was directing myself towards Bunchek the cutter, who had a rabbinical mind.   
Opening the book I would pick a passage at random and read it to them in a transposed   
English almost as primitive as pidgin English. Then I would attempt to explain, choosing   
for example and analogy the 
 
201 
 
things they were familiar with. It was amazing to me how well they understood, how much   
better they understood, let me say, than a college professor or a literary man or any   
educated man. Naturally what they understood had nothing to do finally with Bergson's book,   
as a book, but was not that the purpose of such a book as this? My understanding of the   
meaning of a book is that the book itself disappears from sight, that it is chewed alive,   
digested and incorporated into the system as flesh and blood which in turn creates new   
spirit and reshapes the world. It was a great communion feast which we shared in the   
 135 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reading of this book and the outstanding feature of it was the chapter on Disorder which,   
having penetrated me through and through, has endowed me with such a marvellous sense of   
order that if a comet suddenly struck the earth and jarred everything out of place, stood   
everything upside down, turned everything inside out, I could orient myself to the new   
order in the twinkling of an eye. I have no fear or illusions about disorder any more than   
I have of death. The labyrinth is my happy hunting ground and the deeper I burrow into the   
maze the more oriented I become. 
 
With Creative Evolution under my arm I board the elevated line at the Brooklyn Bridge after   
work and I commence the journey homeward towards the cemetery. Sometimes I get on at   
Delancey Street, the very heart of the ghetto, after a long walk through the crowded   
streets. I enter the elevated line below the ground, like a worm being pushed through the   
intestines. I know each time I take my place in the crowd which mills about the platform   
that I am the most unique individual down there. I look upon everything which is happening   
about me like a spectator from another planet. My language, my world, is under my arm. I am   
the guardian of a great secret; if I were to open my mouth and talk I would tie up traffic.   
What I have to say, and what I am holding in every night of my life on this journey to and   
from the office, is absolute dynamite. I am not ready yet to throw my stick of dynamite. I   
nibble at it meditatively, ruminatively, cogently. Five more years, ten more years perhaps,   
and I will wipe these people out utterly. If the train in making a curve gives a violent  
 
202 
 
lurch I say to myself    fine! jump the track, annihilate them!    I never think of myself as   
being endangered should the train jump the track. We're wedged in like sardines and all the   
hot    flesh    pressed    against    me    diverts    my    thoughts.    I    become    conscious    of    a    pair    of    legs   
wrapped around mine. I look down at the girl sitting in front of me, I look her right in   
the    eye,    and    I    press    my    knees    still    further    into    her    crotch.    She    grows    uneasy,    fidgets   
about in her seat, and finally she turns to the girl next to her and complains that I am   
molesting her. The people about look at me hostilely. I look out of the window blandly and   
pretend I have heard nothing. Even if I wished to I can't remove my legs. Little by little   
though, the girl, by a violent pushing and squiggling, manages to unwrap her legs from   
mine. I find myself almost in the same situation with the girl next to her, the one she was   
addressing her complaints to. Almost at once I feel a sympathetic touch and then, to my   
surprise, I hear her tell the other girl that one can't help these things, that it is   
really not the man's fault but the fault of the company for packing us in like sheep. And   
again I feel the quiver of her legs against mine, a warm, human pressure, like squeezing   
one's hand. With my one free hand I manage to open my book. My object is twofold: first I   
want her to see the kind of book I read, second, I want to be able to carry on the leg   
language without attracting attention. It works beautifully. By the time the train empties   
a bit I am able to take a seat beside her and converse with her - about the book,   
naturally. She's a voluptuous Jewess with enormous liquid eyes and the frankness which come   
from sensuality. When it comes time to get off we walk arm in arm through the streets,   
towards her home. I am almost on the confines of the old neighbourhood. Everything is   
 136 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
familiar to me and yet repulsively strange. I have not walked these streets for years and   
now I am walking with a Jew girl from the ghetto, a beautiful girl with a strong Jewish   
accent. I look incongruous walking beside her. I can sense that people are staring at us   
behind our backs. I am the intruder, the Goy who has come down into the neighbourhood to   
pick off a nice ripe cunt. She on the other hand seems to be proud of her conquest; she's   
showing me off to her friends. This 
 
203 
 
is what I picked up in the train, an educated Goy, a refined Goy! I can almost hear her   
think it. Walking slowly I'm getting the lay of the land, all the practical details which   
will decide whether I call for her after dinner or not. There's no thought of asking her t6   
dinner. It's a question of what time and where to meet and how will we go about it, because   
as she lets drop just before we reach the door, she's got a husband who's a travelling   
salesman and she's got to be careful. I agree to come back and to meet her at the comer in   
front of the candy store at a certain hour. If I want to bring a friend along she'll bring   
her girl friend. No, I decide to see her alone. It's agreed. She squeezes my hand and darts   
off into a dirty hallway. I beat it quickly back to the elevated station and hasten home to   
gulp down the meal. 
 
It's a Summer's night and everything flung wide open. Riding back to meet her the whole   
past rushes up kaleidoscopically. This time I've left the book at home. It's cunt I'm out   
for now and no thought of the book is in my head. I am back again this side of the boundary   
line, each station whizzing past making my world grow more diminutive. I am almost a child   
by the time I reach the destination. I am a child who is horrified by the metamorphosis   
which has taken place. What has happened to me, a man of the 14th Ward, to be jumping off   
at this station in search of a Jewish cunt? Supposing I do give her a fuck, what then? What   
have I got to say to a girl like that? What's a fuck when what I want is love? Yes,   
suddenly it comes over me like a tornado... Una, the girl I loved, the girl who lived here   
in this neighbourhood, Una with big blue eyes and flaxen hair, Una who made me tremble just   
to look at her, Una whom I was afraid to kiss or even to touch her hand. Where is Una? Yes,   
suddenly, that's the burning question:    where is Una ?    In two seconds I am completely   
unnerved, completely lost, desolate, in the most horrible anguish and despair. How did I   
ever let her go? Why? What happened?    When    did it happen? I thought of her like a maniac   
night and day, year in and year out, and then, without even noticing it, she drops out of   
my mind, like that, like a penny falling through a hole in your pocket. Incredible, 
 
204 
 
monstrous, mad. Why all I had to do was to ask her to marry me, ask her hand - that's all.   
If I had done that she would have said yes immediately. She loved me, she loved me   
desperately. Why yes, I remember now, I remember how she looked at me the last time we met.   
I was saying good-bye because I was leaving that night for California, leaving everybody to   
begin a new life. And I never had any intention of leading a new life. I intended to ask   
 137 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her to marry me, but the story I had framed like a dope came out of my lips so naturally   
that I believed it myself, and so I said good-bye and I walked off, arid she stood there   
looking after me and I felt her eyes pierce me through and through. I heard her howling   
inside, but like an automaton I kept on walking and finally I turned the comer and that was   
the end of it. Good-bye! Like that. Like in a coma. And I meant to say come to me! Come to   
me because I can't live any more without you! 
 
I    am so    weak, so    rocky, that    I can    scarcely climb    down the    L steps.    Now I    know what's   
happened - I've crossed the boundary line! This Bible that I've been carrying around with   
me is to instruct me, initiate me into a new way of life. The world I knew is no more, it   
is dead, finished, cleaned up. And everything that I was is cleaned up with it. I am a   
carcass getting an injection of new life. I am bright and glittery, rabid with new   
discoveries, but in the centre it is still leaden, still slag. I begin to weep - right   
there on the L stairs. I sob aloud, like a child. Now it dawns on me with full clarity: you   
are alone in the world!    You are alone . . . alone . . . alone. It is bitter to be   
alone . .. bitter, bitter, bitter, bitter. There is no end to it, it is unfathomable, and   
it is the lot of every man on earth, but especially mine . . . especially mine. Again the   
metamorphosis. Again everything totters, and careens. I am in the dream again, the painful,   
delirious, pleasurable, maddening dream of beyond the boundary. I am standing in the centre   
of the vacant lot, but my home I do not see. I have no home. The dream was a mirage. There   
never was a house in the midst of the vacant lot. That's why I was never able to enter it.   
My home is not in this world, nor in the next I am a man without a home, without a friend,   
without a wife. 
 
205 
 
I am a monster who belongs to a reality which does not exist yet. Ah, but it does exist, it   
will exist, I am sure of it. I walk now rapidly, head down, muttering to myself. I've   
forgotten about my rendezvous so completely that I never even noticed whether I walked past   
her or not. Probably I did. Probably I looked right at her and didn't recognize her.   
Probably she didn't recognize me either. I am mad, mad with pain, mad with anguish. I am   
desperate. But I am not lost. No, there is a reality to which I belong. It's far away, very   
far away. I may walk from now till doomsday with head down and never find her. But it is   
there, I am sure of it. I look at people murderously. If I could throw a bomb and blow the   
whole neighbourhood to smithereens I would do it. I would be happy seeing them fly in the   
air, mangled, shrieking, torn apart, annihilated. I want to annihilate the whole earth. I   
am not a part of it. It's mad from start to finish. The whole shooting match. It's a huge   
piece of stale cheese with maggots festering inside it. Fuck it! Blow it to hell! Kill,   
kill, kill: Kill them all, Jews and Gentiles, young and old, good and bad ... 
 
I grow light, light as a feather, and my pace becomes more steady, more calm, more even.   
What a beautiful night it is! The stars shining so brightly, so serenely, so remotely. Not   
mocking me precisely, but reminding me of the futility of it all. Who are you, young man,   
to be talking of the earth, of blowing things to smithereens? Young man, we have been   
 138 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hanging here for millions and billions of years. We have seen it all, everything, and still   
we shine peacefully every night, we light the way, we still the heart. Look around you,   
young man, see how still and beautiful everything is. Do you see, even the garbage lying in   
the gutter looks beautiful in this light. Pick up the little cabbage leaf, hold it gently   
in your hand. I bend down and pick up the cabbage leaf lying in the gutter. It looks   
absolutely new to me, a whole universe in itself. I break a little piece off and examine   
that. Still a universe. Still unspeakably beautiful and mysterious. I am almost ashamed to   
throw it back in the gutter. I bend down and deposit it gently with the other refuse. I   
become very thoughtful, very, very calm. I love everybody in the world. I know that   
somewhere at this 
 
206 
 
very moment there is a woman waiting for me and if only I proceed very calmly, very gently,   
very slowly, I will come to her. She will be standing on a comer perhaps and when I come in   
sight she will recognize me - immediately. I believe this, so help me God! I believe that   
everything is just and ordained. My home? Why it is the world - the whole world! I am at   
home everywhere, only I did not know it before. But I know now. There is no boundary line   
any more. There never was a boundary line: it was I who made it. I walk slowly and   
blissfully through the streets. The beloved streets. Where everybody walks and everybody   
suffers without showing it. When I stand and lean against a lamp post to light my cigarette   
even the lamp post feels friendly. It is not a thing of iron - it is a creation of the   
human mind, shaped a certain way, twisted and formed by human hands, blown on with human   
breath, placed by human hands and feet. I turn round and rub my hand over the iron surface.   
It almost seems to speak to me. It is a human lamp post. It belongs, like the cabbage leaf,   
like the torn socks, like the mattress, like the kitchen sink. Everything stands in a   
certain way in a certain place, as our mind stands in relation to God. The world, in its   
visible, tangible substance, is a map of our love. Not God but    life    is love. Love, love,   
love. And in the midmost midst of it walks this young man, myself, who is none other than   
Gotdieb Leberecht M uller. 
 
Gotdieb Leberecht M iiller! This is the name of a man who lost his identity. Nobody could   
tell him who he was, where he came from or what had happened to him. In the movies, where I   
first made the acquaintance of this individual it was assumed that he had met with an   
accident in the war. But when I recognized myself on the screen, knowing that I had never   
been to the war, I realized that the author had invented this little piece of fiction in   
order not to expose me. Often I forget which is the real me. Often in my dreams I take the   
draught of forgetfulness, as it is called, and I wander forlorn and desperate, seeking the   
body and the name which is mine. And sometimes between the dream and reality there is only 
 
207 
 
the thinnest line. Sometimes while a person is talking to me I step out of my shoes, and,   
like a plant drifting with the current, I begin the voyage, of my rootless self. In this   
 139 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
condition    I    am    quite    capable    of    fulfilling    the    ordinary    demands    of    life    -    of    finding    a   
wife, of becoming a father, of supporting the household, of entertaining friends, of   
reading books, of paying taxes, of performing military services, and so on and so forth. In   
this condition I am capable if needs be, of killing in cold blood, for the sake of my   
family or to protect my country, or whatever it may be. I am the ordinary, routine citizen   
who answers to a name and who is given a number in his passport. I am thoroughly   
irresponsible for my fate. 
 
Then one day, without the slightest warning, I wake up and looking about me I understand   
absolutely nothing of what is going on about me, neither my own behaviour nor that of my   
neighbours, nor do I understand why the governments are at war or at peace, whichever the   
case may be. At such moments I am born anew, born and baptized by my right name: Gotdieb   
Leberecht M iiller! Everything I do in my right name is looked upon as crazy. People make   
furtive signs behind my back, sometimes to my face even. I am forced to break with friends   
and family and loved ones. I am obliged to break camp. And so, just as naturally as in   
dream, I find myself once again drifting with the current, usually walking along a highway,   
my face set towards the sinking sun. Now all my faculties become alert. I am the most suave   
silky, cunning animal - and I am at the same time what might be called a holy man. I know   
how to fend for myself. I know how to avoid work, how to avoid entangling relationships,   
how to avoid pity, sympathy, bravery, and all the other pitfalls. I stay in place or widi a   
person just long enough to obtain what I need, and then I'm off again. I have no goal: the   
aimless wandering is sufficient unto itself. I am free as a bird, sure as an equilibrist.   
Manna falls from the sky; I have only to hold out my hands and receive. And everywhere I   
leave the most pleasant feeling behind me, as though, in accepting the gifts that are   
showered upon me, I am doing a real favour to others. Even my dirty linen is 
 
208 
 
taken care of by loving hands. Because everybody loves a right-living man! Gottlieb! What a   
beautiful name it is! Gotdieb! I say to myself over and over. Gottlieb Leberecht Muller. 
 
In this condition I have always fallen in with thieves and rogues and murderers, and how   
.kind and gentle they have been with me! As though they were my brothers. And are they not,   
indeed? Have I not been guilty of every crime, and suffered for it? And is it not just   
because of my crimes that I am united so closely to my fellowman? Always, when I see a   
light of recognition in the other person's eyes, I am aware of this secret bond. It is only   
the just whose eyes never light up. It is the just who have never known the secret of human   
fellowship. It is the just who are committing the crimes against man, the just who are the   
real monsters. It is the just who demand our fingerprints, who prove to us that we have   
died even when we stand before them in the flesh. It is the just who impose upon us   
arbitrary    names,    false    names,    who    put    false    dates    in    the    register    and    bury    us    alive.    I   
prefer the thieves, the rogues, the murderers unless I can find a man of my own stature, my   
own quality. 
 
 
 
 140 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
I have never found such a man! I have never found a man as generous as myself, as   
forgiving, as tolerant, as carefree, as reckless, as clean at heart. I forgive myself for   
every crime I have committed. I do it in the name of humanity. I know what it means to be   
human, the weakness and the strength of it. I suffer from this knowledge and I revel in it   
also. If I had the chance to be God I would reject it. If I had the chance to be a star I   
would reject it. The most wonderful opportunity which life offers is to be human. It   
embraces the whole universe. It includes the knowledge of death, which not even God enjoys.   
 
At the point from which this book is written I am the man who baptized himself anew. It is   
many years since this happened and so much has come in between that it is difficult to get   
back to that moment and retrace the journey of Gottlieb Leberecht Muller. However, perhaps   
I can give the clue if I say that the man which I now am was born out of a wound. That   
wound went to the heart. By all man-made logic I should have 
 
209 
 
been dead. I was in fact given up for dead by all who once knew me; I walked about like a   
ghost in their midst. They used the past tense in referring to me, they pitied me, they   
shovelled me under deeper and deeper. Yet I remembered how I used to laugh then, as always,   
how I made love to other women, how I enjoyed my food and drink, and the soft bed which I   
dung to like a fiend. Something had killed me, and yet I was alive. But I was live without   
a memory, without a name; I was cut off from hope as well as from remorse or regret. I had   
no past and I would probably have no future; 
 
I was buried alive in a void which was the wound that had been dealt me. I was the wound   
itself. 
 
I have a friend who talks to me from time to time about the Miracle of Golgotha of which I   
understand nothing. But I do know something about the miraculous wound which I received,   
the wound which killed me in the eyes of the world and out of which I was born anew and   
rebaptized. I know something of the miracle of this wound which I lived and which healed   
with my death. I tell it as of something long past, but it is with me always. Everything is   
long past and seemingly invisible, like a constellation which has sunk forever beneath the   
horizon. 
 
What fascinates me is that anything so dead and buried as I was could be resuscitated, and   
not just once, but innumerable times. And not only that, but each time I faded out I   
plunged deeper than ever into the void, so that with each resuscitation the miracle becomes   
greater. And never any stigmata! The man who is reborn is always the same man, more and   
more himself with each rebirth. He is only shedding his skin each time, and with his skin   
his sins. The man whom God loves is truly a right living man. The man whom God loves is the   
onion with a million skins. To shed the first layer is painful beyond words; the next layer   
is less painful, the next still less, until finally the pain becomes pleasurable, more and   
more pleasurable, a delight, an ecstasy. And then there is neither pleasure not pain, but   
 141 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simply darkness yielding before the light. And as the darkness falls away the wound comes   
out of its hiding place: the wound which is man, man's love, is bathed in light. 
 
210 
 
The identity which was lost is recovered. M an walks forth from his open wound, from the   
grave which he had carried about with him so long. 
 
In the tomb which is my memory I see her buried now, the one I loved better than all else,   
better than the world, better than God, better than my own flesh and blood. I see her   
festering there in that bloody wound of love, so dose to me that I could not distinguish   
her from the wound itself. I see her struggling to free herself, to make herself clean of   
love pain, and with each struggle sinking back again into the wound, mired, suffocated,   
writhing in blood. I see the terrible look in her eyes, the mute piteous agony, the look of   
the beast that is trapped. I see her opening her legs for deliverance and each orgasm a   
groan of anguish. I hear the walls falling, the walls caving in on us and the house going   
up in flames. I hear them calling us from the street, the summons to work, the summons to   
arms, but we are nailed to the floor and the rats are biting into us. The grave and womb of   
love entombing us, the night filling our bowels and the stars shimmering over the black   
bottomless lake. I lose the memory of words, of her name even which I pronounced like a   
monomaniac. I forgot what she looked like, what she felt like, what she smelt like, what   
she fucked like, piercing deeper and deeper into the night of the fathomless cavern. I   
followed her to the deepest hole of her being, to the charnel house of her soul, to the   
breath which had not yet expired from her lips. I sought relentlessly for her whose name   
was not written anywhere, I penetrated to the very altar and found - nothing. I wrapped   
myself around this hollow shell of nothingness like a serpent with fiery coils; I lay still   
for six centuries without breathing as world events sieved through to the bottom forming a   
slimy bed of mucus. I saw the constellations wheeling about the huge hole in the ceiling of   
the universe: I saw the outer planets and the black star which was to deliver me. I saw the   
Dragon shaking itself free of dharma and karma, saw the new race of man stewing in the yolk   
of futurity. I saw through to the last sign and symbol,    but I could not read her face.    I   
could see only the eyes shining through, huge, fleshy-like luminous breasts, as though I   
were swim- 
 
211 
 
ming behind them in the electric effluvia of her incandescent vision.  
 
How had she come to expand thus beyond all grip of consciousness? By what monstrous law had   
she spread herself thus over the face of the world, revealing everything and yet concealing   
herself? She was hidden in the face of the sun, like the moon in eclipse; she was a mirror   
which had lost its quicksilver, the mirror which yields both the image and the horror.   
Looking into the backs of her eyes, into the pulpy translucent flesh, I saw the brain   
structure of all formations, all relations, all evanescence. I saw the brain within the   
 142 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brain, the endless machine endlessly turning, the word Hope revolving on a spit, roasting,   
dripping with fat, revolving ceaselessly in the cavity of the third eye. I heard her dreams   
mumbled in lost tongues, the stifled screams reverberating in minute crevices, the gasps,   
the groans, the pleasurable sighs, the swish of lashing whips. I heard her call my own name   
which I had not yet uttered, I heard her curse and shriek with rage. I heard everything   
magnified a thousand times, like a homunculus imprisoned in the belly organ. I caught the   
muffled breathing of the world, as if fixed in the very crossroads of sound. 
 
Thus we walked and slept and ate together, the Siamese twins whom Love had joined and whom   
Death alone could separate. 
 
We walked upside down, hand in hand, at the neck of the Bottle. She dressed in black almost   
exclusively, except for patches of purple now and then. She wore no underclothes, just a   
simple sheet of black velvet saturated with a diabolical perfume. We went to bed at dawn   
and got up just as it was darkling. We lived in black holes with drawn curtains, we ate   
from black plates, we read from black books. We looked out of the black hole of our life   
into the black hole of the world. The sun was permanently blacked out, as though to aid us   
in continuous internecine strife. For sun we had Mars, for moon Saturn: we lived   
permanently in the zenith of the underworld. The earth had ceased to revolve and through   
the hole in the sky above us there hung the black star which never twinkled. Now and then   
we had fits of laughter, crazy, batrachian laughter 
 
212 
 
which made the neighbours shudder. Now and then we sang, delirious, on-key, full tremolo.   
We were locked in throughout the long dark night of the soul, a period of incommensurable   
time which began and ended in the manner of an eclipse. We revolved about our own egos,   
like phantom satellites. We were drunk with our own image which we saw when we looked into   
each other's eyes. How then did we look to others ? As the beast looks to the plant, as the   
stars look to the beast. Or as God would look to man if the devil had given him wings. And   
with it all, in the fixed, dose intimacy of a night without end she was radiant, jubilant,   
an ultra-black jubilation streaming from her like a steady flow of sperm from the Mithraic   
Bull. She was double-barrelled, like a shot-gun, a female bull with an acetylene torch in   
her womb. In heat she focussed on the grand cosmocrator, her eyes rolled back to the   
whites, her lips a-saliva. In the blind hole of sex she waltzed like a trained mouse, her   
jaws unhinged like a snake's, her skin horripilating in barbed plumes. She had the   
insatiable lust of a unicorn, the itch that laid the Egyptians low. Even the hole in the   
sky through which the lacklustre star shone down was swallowed up in her fury. 
 
We lived glued to the ceiling, the hot, rancid fume of the everyday life steaming up and   
suffocating us. We lived at marble heat, the ascending glow of human flesh warming the   
snake-like coils in which we were locked. We lived riveted to the nethermost depths, our   
skins smoked to the colour of a grey cigar by the fumes of worldly passion. Like two heads   
carried on the pikes of our executioners we circled slowly and fixedly over the heads and   
 143 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shoulders of the world below. What was life on the solid earth to us who were decapitated   
and forever joined at the genitals? We were the twin snakes of Paradise, lucid in heat and   
cool as chaos itself. Life was a perpetual black fuck about a fixed pole of insomnia. Life   
was Scorpio conjunction Mars, conjunction Mercury, conjunction Venus, conjunction Saturn,   
conjunction Pluto, conjunction Uranus, conjunction quicksilver, laudanum, radium, bismuth.   
The grand conjunction was every Saturday night, Leo fornicating with Draco in the house of   
brother and sister. The great 
 
213 
 
malheur was a ray of sunlight stealing through the curtains. The great curse was Jupiter,   
king of the fishes, that he might flash a benevolent eye. 
 
The reason why it is difficult to tell it is because I remember too much. I remember   
everything, but like a dummy sitting on the lap of a ventriloquist. It seems to me that   
throughout the long, uninterrupted connubial solstice I sat on her lap (even when she was   
standing) and spoke the lines she had taught me. It seems to me that she must have   
commanded God's chief plumber to keep the black star shining through the hole in the   
ceiling, must have bid him to rain down perpetual night and with it all the crawling   
torments that move noiselessly about in the dark so that the mind becomes a twirling awl   
burrowing frantically into black nothingness. Did I only imagine that she talked   
incessantly, or had I become such a marvellously trained dummy that I intercepted the   
thought before it reached the lips? The lips were finely parted, smoothed down with a thick   
paste of dark blood: I watched them open and dose with the utmost fascination, whether they   
hissed a viper's hate or cooed like a turtle dove. They were always close-up, as in the   
movie stills, so that I knew every crevice, every pore, and when the hysterical salivating   
began I watched the spittle fume and foam as though I were sitting in a rocking chair under   
Niagara Falls. I learned what to do just as though I were a part of her organism; I was   
better than a ventriloquist's dummy because I could act without being violently jerked by   
strings. Now and then I did things impromptu like, which sometimes pleased her enormously;   
she would pretend, of course, not to notice these interruptions, but I could always tell   
when she was pleased by the way she preened herself. She had the gift for transformation;   
almost as quick and subtle she was as the devil himself. Next to the panther and the jaguar   
she did the bird stuff best: the wild heron, the ibis, the flamingo, the swan in rut. She   
had a way of swooping suddenly, as if she had spotted a ripe carcass, diving right into the   
bowels, pouncing immediately on the tidbits - the heart, the liver, or the ovaries -and   
making off again in the twinkling of an eye. Did someone spot her, she would lie stone   
quiet at the base of a tree, her 
 
214 
 
eyes not quite dosed but immovable in that fixed stare of the basilisk. Prod her a bit and   
she would become a rose, a deep black rose with the most velvety petals and of a fragrance   
that was overpowering. It was amazing how marvellously I learned to take my cue; no matter   
 144 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how swift the metamorphosis I was always there in her lap, bird lap, beast lap, snake lap,   
rose lap, what matter: the lap of laps, the lip of lips, tip to tip, feather to feather,   
the yolk in the egg, the pearl in the oyster, a cancer clutch, a tincture of sperm and   
cantharides. Life was Scorpio conjunction Mars, conjunction Venus, Saturn, Uranus, et   
cetera, love was conjunctivitis of the mandibles, dutch this, dutch that, clutch, clutch,   
the mandibular clutch-clutch of the mandala wheel of lust. Come food time I could already   
hear her peeling the eggs, and inside the egg cheep-cheep, blessed omen of the next meal to   
come. I ate like a monomaniac: the prolonged dreamlit voracity of the man who is thrice   
breaking his fast. And as I ate she purred, the rhythmic predatory wheeze of the succubus   
devouring her young. What a blissful night of love! Saliva, sperm, succubation,   
sphincteritis all in one: the conjugal orgy in the Black Hole of Calcutta. 
 
Out there where the black star hung, a Pan-Islamic silence, as in the cavern world where   
even the wind is stilled. Out there, did I dare to brood on it, the spectral quietude of   
insanity, the world of men, lulled, exhausted by centuries of incessant slaughter. Out   
there one gory encompassing membrane within which all activity took place, the hero-world   
of lunatics and maniacs who had quenched the light of the heaven with blood. How peaceful   
our little dove-and-vulture life in the dark! Flesh to bury in with teeth or penis,   
abundant odorous flesh with no mark of knife or scissors, no scar of exploded shrapnel, no   
mustard bums, no scalded lungs. Save for the hallucinating hole in the ceiling, an almost   
perfect womb life. But the hole was there - like a fissure in the bladder - and no wadding   
could plug it permanently, no urination could pass off with a smile. Piss large and freely,   
aye, but how forget the rent in the belfry, the silence unnatural, the imminence, the   
terror, the poom of the "other" world? Eat a bellyful, aye, and tomorrow another bellyful,   
and tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow - 
 
215 
 
but finally, what then? Finally ? What was finally? A change of ventriloquist, a change of   
lap, a shift in the axis, another rift in the vault...    what ?    what ?    I'll tell    you -   
sitting in her lap, petrified by the still, pronged beams of the black star, homed,   
snaffled, hitched and trepanned by the telepathic acuity of your interacting agitation, I   
thought of nothing at all, nothing that was outside the cell we inhabited, not even the   
thought of a crumb on a white tablecloth. I thought purely within the walls of our amoebic   
life, the pure thought such as Immanuel Pussyfoot Kant gave us and which only a   
ventriloquist's dummy could reproduce. I thought out every theory of science, every theory   
of art, every grain of truth in every cock-eyed system of salvation. I calculated   
everything    out    to    a    pin    point    with    gnostic    decimals    to    boot,    like    primes    which    a    drunk   
hands out at the finish of a six-day-race. But everything was calculated for another life   
which somebody else would live some day -perhaps. We were at the very neck of the bottle,   
her and I, as they say, but the neck had been broken off and the bottle was only a fiction.   
 
I remember how the second time I met her she told me that she had never expected to see me   
again, and the next time I saw her she said she thought I was a dope fiend, and the next   
 145 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time she called me a god, and after that she tried to commit suicide and then I tried and   
then she tried again, and nothing worked except to bring us closer together, so close   
indeed that we interpenetrated, exchanged personalities, name, identity, religion, father,   
mother, brother. Even her body went through a radical change, not once but several times.   
At first she was big and velvety, like the jaguar, with that silky, deceptive strength of   
the feline species, the crouch, the spring, the pounce; then she grew emaciated, fragile,   
delicate almost like a cornflower, and with each change thereafter she went through the   
subtlest modulations - of skin, muscle, colour, posture, odour, gait, gesture, et cetera.   
She changed like a chameleon. Nobody could say what she really was like because with each   
one she was an entirely different person. After a time she didn't even know herself what   
she was like. She had begun this process of metamorphosis before I met her, as I later dis-   
 
2l6 
 
covered. Like so many women who think themselves ugly she had willed to make herself   
beautiful, dazzlingly beautiful. To do this she first of all renounced her name, then her   
family, her friends, everything which might attach her to the past. With all her wits and   
faculties she devoted herself to the cultivation of her beauty, other charm, which she   
already possessed to a high degree but which she had been made to believe were nonexistent.   
She lived constantly before the mirror, studying every movement, every gesture, every   
slightest grimace. She changed her whole manner of speech, her diction, her intonation, her   
accent, her phraseology. She conducted herself so skilfully that it was impossible even to   
broach the subject of origins. She was constantly on her guard, even in her sleep. And,   
like a good general, she discovered quickly enough that the best defence is attack. She   
never left a single position unoccupied; her outposts, her scouts, her sentinels were   
stationed everywhere. Her mind was a revolving searchlight which was never dimmed.  
 
Blind to her own beauty, her own charm, her own personality, to say nothing of her   
identity, she launched her full powers towards the fabrication of a mythical creature, a   
Helen, a Juno, whose charms neither man nor woman would be able to resist. Automatically,   
without the slightest knowledge of legend, she began to create little by little the   
ontological background, the mythic sequence of events preceding the conscious birth. She   
had no need to remember her lies, her fictions - she had only to bear in mind her role.   
There was no lie too monstrous for her to utter, for in her adopted role she was absolutely   
faithful to herself. She did not have to    invent    a past: she    remembered    the past which   
belonged to her. She was never outflanked by a direct question since she never presented   
herself to an adversary except obliquely. She presented only the angles of the everturning   
facets, the blinding prisms of light which she kept constantly revolving. She was never a   
being, such as might finally be caught in repose, but the mechanism itself, relentlessly   
operating the myriad mirrors which would reflect the myth she had created. She had no poise   
what soever; she was eternally poised above her multiple identities 
 
217 
 
 
 
 146 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
in the vacuum of the self. She had not intended to make herself a legendary figure, she had   
merely wanted her beauty to be recognized. But, in the pursuit of beauty, she soon forgot   
her quest entirely, became the victim of her own creation. She became so stunningly   
beautiful that at times she was frightening, at times positively uglier than the ugliest   
woman in the world. She could inspire horror and dread, especially when her charm was at   
its height. It was as though the will, blind and uncontrollable, shone through the   
creation, exposing the monster which it is. 
 
In the dark, locked away in the black hole with no world looking on, no adversary, no   
rivals, the blinding dynamism of the will slowed down a bit, gave her a molten copperish   
glow, the words coming out of her mouth like lava, her flesh clutching ravenously for a   
hold, a perch on something solid and substantial, something in which to reintegrate and   
repose for a few moments. It was like a frantic long distance message, an S.O.S. from a   
sinking ship. At first I mistook it for passion, for the ecstasy produced by flesh rubbing   
against flesh. I thought I had found a living volcano, a female Vesuvius. I never thought   
of a human ship going down in an ocean of despair, in a Sargasso of impotence. Now I think   
of that black star gleaming through the hole in the ceiling, that fixed star which hung   
above our conjugal cell, more fixed, more remote than the Absolute, and I know it was her,   
emptied of all that was properly herself: a dead black sun without aspect. I know that we   
were conjugating the verb love like two maniacs trying to fuck through an iron grate. I   
said that in the frantic grappling in the dark I sometimes forgot her name, what she looked   
like, who she was. It's true. I overeached myself in the dark. I slid off the flesh rails   
into the endless space of sex, into the channel-orbits established by this one and that   
one; Georgiana, for instance, of only a brief afternoon, Telma, the Egyptian whore,   
Carlotta, Alannah, Una, Mona, Magda, girls of six or seven; waifs, will'o'-the-wisps,   
faces,    bodies,    thighs,    a    subway    brush,    a    dream,    a    memory,    a    desire,    a    longing.    I    could   
start with Georgiana of a Sunday afternoon near the railroad tracks, her dotted Swiss   
dress, her swaying haunch, her Southern drawl, 
 
2l8 
 
her lascivious mouth, her molten breasts, I could start with Georgiana, the myriad branched   
candelabra of sex, and work outwards and upwards through the ramification of cunt into the   
nth dimension of sex, world without end. Georgiana was like the membrane of the tiny little   
ear of an unfinished monster called sex. She was transparently alive and breathing in the   
light of the memory of a brief afternoon on the avenue, the first tangible odour and   
substance of the world of fuck which is in itself a being limitless and undefinable, like   
our world the world. The whole world of fuck like unto the ever-increasing membrane of the   
animal we call sex, which is like another being growing into our own being and gradually   
displacing it, so that in time the human world will be only a dim memory of this new, all- 
inclusive, all-procreative being which is giving birth to itself. 
 
It was precisely this snake-like copulation in the dark, this double-jointed, double- 
barrelled hook-up, which put me in the strait-jacket of doubt, jealousy, fear, loneliness.   
 147 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If I began my hem-stitching with Georgiana and the myriad-branched candelabra of sex I was   
certain that she too was at work building membrane, making ears, eyes, toes, scalp and   
what-not of sex. She would begin with the monster who had raped her, assuming there was   
truth in the story; in any case she too began somewhere on a parallel track, working   
upwards and outwards through this multiform, uncreated being through whose body we were   
both striving desperately to meet. Knowing only a fraction of her life, possessing only a   
bag of lies, of inventions, of imaginings, of obsessions and delusions, putting together   
tag-ends, coke dreams, reveries, unfinished sentences, jumbled dream talk, hysterical   
ravings, ill-disguised fantasies, morbid desires, meeting now and then a name become flesh,   
overhearing stray bits of conversation, observing smuggled glances, half-arrested gestures,   
I could well credit her with a pantheon of her own private fucking gods, of only too vivid   
flesh and blood creatures, men of perhaps that very afternoon, of perhaps only an hour ago,   
her cunt perhaps still choked with the sperm of the last fuck. The more submissive she was,   
the more passionately she behaved, the more abandoned she looked, the 
 
219 
 
more uncertain I became. There was no beginning, no personal, individual starting point; we   
met like experienced swordsmen on the field of honour now crowded with the ghosts of   
victory and defeat We were alert and responsible to the least thrust, as only the practiced   
can be. 
 
We came together under cover of dark with our armies and from opposite sides we forced the   
gates of the citadel. There was no resisting our bloody work; we asked for no quarter and   
we gave none. We came together swimming in blood, a gory, glaucous reunion in the night   
with all the stars extinguished save the fixed black star hanging like a scalp above the   
hole in the ceiling. If she were properly coked she would vomit it forth like an oracle,   
everything that had happened to her during the day, yesterday, the day before, the year   
before last, everything, down to the day she was born. And not a word of it was true, not a   
single detail. Not a moment did she stop, for if she had, the vacuum she created in her   
flight would have brought about an explosion fit to sunder the world. She was the world's   
lying machine in microcosm, geared to the same unending, devastating fear which enables men   
to throw all their energies into creation of the death apparatus. To look at her one would   
think her fearless, one would think her the personification of courage and she was, so long   
as she was not obliged to turn in her traces. Behind her lay the calm fact of reality, a   
colossus which dogged her every step. Every day this colossal reality took on new   
proportions, every day it became more terrifying, more paralysing. Every day she had to   
grow swifter wings, sharper jaws, more piercing, hypnotic eyes. It was a race to the   
outermost limits of the world, a race lost from the start, and no one to stop it. At the   
edge of the vacuum stood Truth, ready in one lightning-like sweep to recover the stolen   
ground. It was so simple and obvious that it drove her frantic. Marshal a thousand   
personalities, commandeer the biggest guns, deceive the greatest minds, make the longest   
detour - still the end would be defeat. In the final meeting everything was destined to   
fall apart - the cunning, the skill, the power, everything. She would be a grain of sand on   
 148 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the shore of the biggest ocean, and, worse than anything, she would resemble 
 
220 
 
each and every other grain of sand on that ocean's shore. She would be condemned to   
recognize her unique self everywhere until the end of time. What a fate she had chosen for   
herself! That her uniqueness should be engulfed in the universal! That her power should be   
reduced to the utmost node of passivity! It was maddening, hallucinating. It could not be!   
It    must    not be! Onward! Like the black legions. Onward! Through every degree of the   
everwidening circle. Onward and away from the self, until the last substantial particle of   
the soul be stretched to infinity. In her panic-stricken flight she seemed to bear the   
whole world in her womb. We were being driven out of the confines of the universe towards a   
nebula which no instrument could visualize. We were being rushed to a pause so still, so   
prolonged, that death by comparison seems a mad witches' revel.  
 
In the morning, gazing at the bloodless crater of her face. Not a line in it, not a   
wrinkle, not a single blemish! The look of an angel in the arms of the Creator. Who killed   
Cock Robin ? Who massacred the Iroquois? Not I, my lovely angel could say, and by God, who   
gazing at that pure, blameless face could deny her? Who could see in that sleep of   
innocence that one half of the face belonged to God and the other half to Satan? The mask   
was smooth as death, cool, lovely to    the    touch, waxen, like a petal open to the faintest   
breeze. So alluringly still and guileless was it that one could drown in it, one could go   
down into it, body and all, like a diver, and nevermore return. Until the eyes opened upon   
the world she would lie like that, thoroughly extinguished and gleaming with a reflected   
light, like the moon itself. In her death-like trance of innocence she fascinated even   
more; her crimes dissolved, exuded through the pores, she lay coiled like a sleeping   
serpent riveted to the earth. The body, strong, lithe, muscular, seemed possessed of a   
weight unnatural; she had a more than human gravity, the gravity, one might almost say, of   
a warm corpse. She was like one might imagine the beautiful Nefertiti to have been after   
the first thousand years of mummification, a marvel of mortuary perfection, a dream of   
flesh preserved from mortal decay. She lay coiled at the base of a hollow pyra- 
 
221 
 
mid, enshrined in the vacuum of her own creation like a sacred relic of the past. Even her   
breathing seemed stopped, so profound was her slumber. She had dropped below the human   
sphere, below the animal sphere, below the vegetative sphere even: she had sunk down to the   
level of the mineral world where animation is just a notch above death. She had so mastered   
the art of deception that even the dream was powerless to betray her. She had learned how   
to not dream: when she coiled up in sleep she automatically switched off the current. If   
one could have caught her thus and opened up the skull one would have found it absolutely   
void. She kept no disturbing secrets; everything was killed off which could be humanly   
killed. She might live on endlessly, like the moon, like any dead planet, radiating an   
hypnotic effulgence, creating tides of passion, engulfing the world in madness,   
 149 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discolouring all earthly substances with her magnetic, metallic rays. Sowing her own death   
she brought everyone about her to fever pitch. In the heinous stillness of her sleep she   
renewed her own magnetic death by union with the cold magma of the lifeless planetary   
worlds. She was magically intact. Her gaze fell upon one with a transpiercing fixity: it   
was the moon gaze through which the dead dragon of life gave off a cold fire. The one eye   
was a warm brown, the colour of an autumn leaf; the other was hazel, the magnetic eye which   
flickered a compass needle. Even in sleep this eye continued to nicker under the shutter of   
the lid; it was the only apparent sign of life in her. 
 
The moment she opened her eyes she was wide awake. She awoke with a violent start, as if   
the sight of the world and its human paraphernalia were a shock. Instantly she was in full   
activity, lashing about like a great python. What annoyed her was the light! She awoke   
cursing the sun, cursing the glare of reality. The room had to be darkened, the candles   
lit, the the windows tightly shut to prevent the noise of the street from penetrating the   
room.    She    moved    about    naked    with    a    cigarette    dangling    from    the    comer    of    her    mouth.    Her   
toilet was an affair of great preoccupation; a thousand trifling details had to be attended   
to before she could so much as don a bathrobe. She was like an athlete preparing for the   
great event of the day. 
 
222 
 
From the roots of her hair, which she studied with keen attention, to the shape and length   
of her toe-nails, every part of her anatomy was thoroughly inspected before sitting down to   
breakfast. Like an athlete I said she was, but in fact she was more like a mechanic   
overhauling a fast plane for a test flight. Once she slipped on her dress she was launched   
for the day, for the flight which might end perhaps in Irkutsk or Teheran. She would take   
on enough fuel at breakfast to last the entire trip. The breakfast was a prolonged affair:   
it was the one ceremony of the day over which she dawdled and lingered. It was   
exasperatingly prolonged, indeed. One wondered if she would ever take on, one wondered if   
she had forgotten the grand mission which she had sworn to accomplish each day. Perhaps she   
was dreaming other itinerary, or perhaps she was not dreaming at all but simply allowing   
time for the functional processes of her marvellous machine so that once embarked there   
would be no turning back. She was very calm and self-possessed at this hour of the day; she   
was like a great bird of the air perched on a mountain crag, dreamily surveying the terrain   
below. It was not from the breakfast table that she would suddenly swoop and dive to pounce   
upon her prey. No, from the early morning perch she would take off slowly and majestically,   
synchronizing her every movement with the pulse of the motor. All space lay before her, her   
direction dictated only by caprice. She was almost the image of freedom, were it not for   
the Saturnian weight of her body and the abnormal span of her wings. However poised she   
seemed, especially at the take-on, one sensed the terror which motivated the daily flight.   
She was at once obedient to her destiny and at the same time frantically eager to overcome   
it. Each morning she soared aloft from her perch, as from some Himalayan peak; she seemed   
always to direct her flight towards some uncharted region into which, if all went well, she   
would disappear forever. Each morning she seemed to carry aloft with her this desperate,   
 150 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
last-minute hope; she took leave with calm, grave dignity, like one about to go down into   
the grave. Never once did she circle about the flying field; never once did she cast a   
glance backward towards those whom she was abandon- 
 
223 
 
ing. Nor did she leave the slightest crumb of personality behind her; she took to the air   
with all her belongings, with every slightest scrap of evidence which might testify to the   
fact of her existence. She didn't even leave the breath of a sigh behind, not even a toe- 
nail. A clean exit, such as the Devil himself might make for reasons of his own. One was   
left with a great void on his hands. One was deserted, and not only deserted, but betrayed,   
inhumanly betrayed. One had no desire to detain her nor to call her back; one was left with   
a curse on his lips, with a black hatred which darkened the whole day. Later, moving about   
the city, moving slowly in pedestrian fashion, crawling like the worm, one gathered rumours   
of her spectacular flight; she had been seen rounding a certain point, she had dipped here   
or there for what reason no one knew, she had done a tailspin elsewhere, she had passed   
like a comet, she had written letters of smoke in the sky, and so on and so forth.   
Everything she had done was enigmatic and exasperating, done apparently without purpose. It   
was like a symbolic and ironic commentary on human life, on the behaviour of the ant-like   
creature man, viewed from another dimension. 
 
Between the time she took off and the time she returned I lived the life of a full blooded   
schizerino. It was not an eternity which elapsed, because somehow eternity has to do with   
peace and with victory, it is something man-made, something earned: no, I experienced an   
entr'acte in which every hair turns white to the roots, in which every millimetre of skin   
itches and burns until the whole body becomes a running sore. I see myself sitting before a   
table in the dark, my hands and feet growing enormous, as though elephantiasis were   
overtaking me at a gallop. I hear the blood rushing up to the brain and pounding at the   
ear-drums like Himalayan devils with sledge hammers; I hear her flapping her huge wings,   
even in Irkutsk, and I know she is pushing on and on, ever further away, ever further   
beyond reach. It is so quiet in the room and so frightfully empty that I shriek and howl   
just to make a little noise, a little human sound. I try to lift myself from the table but   
my feet are too heavy and my hands have become like the shapeless feet of the rhinoceros.   
The 
 
224 
 
heavier my body becomes the lighter the atmosphere of the room; I am going to spread and   
spread until I fill the room with one solid mass of stiff jelly. I shall fill up even the   
cracks in the wall; I shall grow through the wall like a parasitic plant, spreading and   
spreading until the whole house is an indescribable mass of flesh and hair and nails. I   
know that this is death, but I am powerless to kill the knowledge of it, or the knower.   
Some tiny particle of me is alive, some speck of consciousness persists, and, as the inert   
carcass expands, this flicker of life becomes sharper and sharper and gleams inside me like   
 151 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the cold fire of a gem. It lights up the whole gluey mass of pulp so that I am like a diver   
with a torch in the body of a dead marine monster. By some slender hidden filament I am   
still connected with the life above the surface of the deep, but it is so far away, the   
upper world, and the weight of the corpse so great that, even if it were possible, it would   
take years to reach the surface. I move around in my own dead body, exploring every nook   
and cranny of its huge, shapeless mass. It is an endless exploration, for with the   
ceaseless growth the whole topography changes, slipping and drifting like the hot magma of   
the earth. Never for a minute is there terra firma, never for a minute does anything remain   
still and recognizable: it is a growth without landmarks, a voyage in which the destination   
changes with every least move or shudder. It is this interminable filling of space which   
kills all sense of space or time; the more the body expands the tinier becomes the world,   
until at last I feel that everything is concentrated on the head of a pin. Despite the   
floundering of this enormous dead mass which I have become, I feel that what sustains it,   
the world out of which it grows, is no bigger than a pinhead. In the midst of pollution, in   
the very heart and gizzard of death, as it were, I sense the seed, the miraculous,   
infinitesimal lever which balances the world. I have overspread the world like a syrup and   
the emptiness of it is terrifying, but there is no dislodging the seed; the seed has become   
a little knot of cold fire which roars like a sun in the vast hollow of the dead carcass. 
 
When the great plunder-bird returns exhausted from her flight she will find me here in the   
midst of my nothingness, I, 
 
225 
 
the imperishable schizerino, a blazing seed hidden in the heart of death. Every day she   
thinks to find another means of sustenance, but there is no other, only this eternal seed   
of light which by dying each day I rediscover for her. Fly, 0 devouring bird, fly to the   
limits of the universe! Here is your nourishment glowing in the sickening emptiness you   
have created! You will come back to perish once more in the black hole; you will come back   
again and again, for you have not the wings to carry you out of the world. This is the only   
world you can inhabit, this tomb of the snake where darkness reigns. 
 
And suddenly for no reason at all, when I think of her returning to her nest, I remember   
Sunday mornings in the little old house near the cemetery. I remember sitting at the piano   
in my nightshirt, working away at the pedals with bare feet, and the folks lying in bed   
toasting themselves in the next room. The rooms opened one on the other, telescope fashion,   
as in the good old American railroad flats. Sunday mornings one lay in bed until one was   
ready to screech with well-being. Towards eleven or so the folks used to rap on the wall of   
my bedroom for me to come and play for them. I would dance into the room like the   
Fratellini Brothers, so full of flame and feathers that I could hoist myself like a derrick   
to the topmost limb of the tree of heaven. I could do anything and everything singlehanded,   
being double-jointed at the same time. The old man called me "Sunny Jim", because I was   
full of "Force", full of vim and vigour. First I would do a few handsprings for them on the   
carpet before the bed; then I would sing falsetto, trying to imitate a ventriloquist's   
 152 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dummy; then I would dance a few light fantastic steps to show which way the wind lay, and   
zoom! Like a breeze I was on the piano stool and doing a velocity exercise. I always began   
with Czemy, in order to limber up for the performance. The old man hated Czemy, and so did   
I, but Czemy was the plat du jour on the bill of fare then, and so Czemy  it was until my   
joints were rubber. In some vague way Czemy reminds me of the great emptiness which came   
upon me later. What a velocity I would work up, riveted to the piano stool! It was like   
swallowing a bottle of tonic at one gulp and then having someone strap you to the bed.   
After I had played 
 
226 
 
about ninety-eight exercises I was ready to do a little improvising. I used to take a fist- 
full of chords and crash the piano from one end to the other, then sullenly modulate into   
"The Burning of Rome" or the "Ben Hur Chariot Race" which everybody liked because it was   
intelligible noise. Long before I read Wittgenstein's Tractatvs Logico-Philosophicus I was   
composing the music to it, in the key of sassafras. I was learned then in science and   
philosophy, in the history of religions, in inductive and deductive logic, in liver mantic,   
in the shape and weight of skulls, in pharmacopeia and metallurgy, in all the useless   
branches of learning which gives you indigestion and melancholia before your time. This   
vomit of learned truck was stewing in my guts the whole week long, waiting for it to come   
Sunday to be set to music. In between "The M idnight Fire Alarm" and "Marche Militaire" I   
would get my inspiration, which was to destroy all the existent forms of harmony and create   
my own cacophony. Imagine Uranus well aspected to Mars, to Mercury, to the Moon, to   
Jupiter, to Venus. It's hard to imagine because Uranus functions best when it is badly   
aspected, when it is "afflicted", so to speak. Yet that music which I gave off Sunday   
mornings, a music of well-being and of well-nourished desperation, was born of an   
illogically well-aspected Uranus firmly anchored in the 7th House. I didn't know it then, I   
didn't know that Uranus existed, and lucky it was that I was ignorant. But I can see it   
now, because it was a fluky joy, a phony well-being, a destructive sort of fiery creation.   
The greater my euphoria the more tranquil the folks became. Even my sister who was dippy   
became calm and composed. The neighbours used to stand outside the window and listen, and   
now and then I would hear a burst of applause, and then bang, zip! like a rocket I was off   
again - Velocity Exercise No. 9471/2. If I happened to espy a cockroach crawling up the wall   
I was in bliss: that would lead me without the slightest modulation to Opus Izzi of my   
sadly corrugated clavichord. One Sunday, just like that, I composed one of the loveliest   
scherzos imaginable - to a louse. It was Spring and we were all getting the sulphur   
treatment; I had been pouring all week over Dante's 
Inferno in 
 
227 
 
English. Sunday came like a thaw, the birds driven so crazy by the sudden heat that they   
flew in and out of the window, immune to the music. One of the German relatives had just   
arrived from Hamburg, or Bremen, a maiden aunt who looked like a bull-dyker. Just to be   
near her was sufficient to throw roe into a fit of rage. She used to pat me on the head and   
 153 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tell me I would be another Mozart. I hated M ozart, and I hate him still, and so to get even   
with her I would play badly, play all the sour notes I knew. And then came the little   
louse, as I was saying, a real louse which had gotten buried in my winter underwear. I got   
him out and I put him tenderly on the tip of a black key. Then I began to do a little gigue   
around him with my right hand, the noise had probably deafened him tenderly on the tip of a   
black key. Then hypnotized, it seemed, by my nimble pyrotechnic. This trance-like   
immobility finally got on my nerves. I decided to introduce a chromatic scale coming down   
on him full force with my third finger. I caught him fair and square, but with such force   
that he was glued to my fingertip. That put the St. Vitus' Dance in me. From then on the   
scherzo commenced. It was a pot-pourri of forgotten melodies spiced with aloes and the   
juice of porcupines, played sometimes in three keys at once and pivoting always like a   
waltzing mouse around the immaculate conception. Later, when I went to hear Prokofief, I   
understood what was happening to him; I understood Whitehead and Russell and Jeans and   
Eddington and Rudolf Eucken and Frobenius and Link Gillespie; I understood why, if there   
had never been a binomial theorem, man would have invented it; I understood why electricity   
and compressed air, to say nothing of sprudel baths and fango packs. I understood very   
dearly, I must say, that man has a dead louse in his blood, and that when you're handed a   
symphony or a fresco or a high explosive you're really getting an ipecac reaction which was   
not included in the predestined bill of fare. I understood too why I had failed to become   
the musician I was. All the compositions I had created in my head, all these private and   
artistic auditions which were permitted me, thanks to St. Hildegarde or St. Bridget, or   
John of the Cross, or God knows whom, were written for an age to come, an age with less  
 
228 
 
instruments and stronger antennae, stronger eardrums too. A different kind of suffering has   
to be experienced before such music can be appreciated. Beethoven staked out the new   
territory - one is aware of its presence when he erupts, when he breaks down in the very   
core of his stillness. It is a realm of new vibrations - to us only a misty nebula, for we   
have yet to pass beyond our own conception of suffering. We have yet to ingest this   
nebulous world, its travail, its orientation. I was permitted to hear an incredible music   
lying prone and indifferent to the Sorrow about me. I heard the gestation of a new world,   
the sound of torrential rivers taking their course, the sound of stars grinding and   
chafing, of fountains clotted with blazing gems. All music is still governed by the old   
astronomy, is the product of the hothouse, a panacea for Weltschmerz. M usic is still the   
antidote for the nameless, but this is not yet    music.    M usic is planetary fire, an   
irreducible which is all-sufficient; it is the slate-writing of the gods, the abracadabra   
which the learned and the ignorant alike muff because the axle has been unhooked. Look to   
the bowels, to the unconsolable and ineluctable! Nothing is determined, nothing is settled   
or solved. All this that is going on, all music, all architecture, all law, all government,   
all invention, all discovery - all this is velocity exercises in the dark, Czemy with a   
capital Zed riding a crazy white horse in a bottle of mucilage. 
 
One of the reasons why I never got anywhere with the bloody music is that it was always   
 154 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mixed up with sex. As soon as I was able to play a song the cunts were around me like   
flies. To begin with, it was largely Lola's fault. Lola was my first piano teacher. Lola   
Niessen. It was a ridiculous name and typical of the neighbourhood we were living in then.   
It sounded like a stinking bloater, or a wormy cunt. To tell the truth, Lola was not   
exactly a beauty. She looked somewhat like a Kalmuck or a Chinook, with sallow complexion   
and bilious-looking eyes. She had a few warts and wens, not to speak of the moustache. What   
excited me, however, was her hairiness; she had wonderful long fine black hair which she   
arranged in ascending and descending buns on her Mongolian skull. At the nape of the neck   
she curled it up in a serpentine knot. She was always late 
 
229 
 
in coming, being a conscientious idiot, and by the time she arrived I was always a bit   
enervated from masturbating. As soon as she took the stool beside me, however, I became   
exdted again, what with the stinking perfume she soused her armpits with. In the summer she   
wore loose sleeves and I could see the tufts'of hair under her arms. The sight of it drove   
me wild. I imagined her as having hair all over, even in her navel. And what I wanted to do   
was to roll in it, bury my teeth in it. I could have eaten Lola's hair as a delicacy, if   
there had been a bit of flesh attached to it. Anyway she was hairy, that's what I want to   
say and being hairy as a gorilla she got my mind off the the music and on to her cunt. I   
was so damned eager to see that cunt of hers that finally one day I bribed her little   
brother to let me have a peep at her while she was in the bath. It was even more wonderful   
than I had imagined: she had a shag that reached from the navel to the crotch, an enormous   
thick tuft, a sporran, rich as a hand-woven rug. When she went over it with the powder puff   
I thought I would faint. The next time she came for the lesson I left a couple of buttons   
open on my fly. She didn't seem to notice anything amiss. The following time I left my   
whole fly open. This time she caught on. She said, "I think you've forgotten something.   
Henry." I looked at her, red as a beet, and I asked her blandly    what ?    She pretended to   
look away while pointing to it with her left hand. Her hand came so close that I couldn't   
resist grabbing it and pushing it in my fly. She got up. quickly, looking pale and   
frightened. By this time my prick was out of my fly and quivering with delight. I closed in   
on her and I reached up under her dress to get at that hand-woven rug I had seen through   
the keyhole. Suddenly I got a sound box on the ears, and then another and she took me by   
the ear and leading me to a comer of the room she turned my face to the wall and said, "Now   
button up your fly, you silly boy!" We went back to the piano in a few moments - back to   
Czemy and the velocity exercises. I couldn't see a sharp from a flat any more, but I   
continued to play because I was afraid she might tell my mother about the incident.   
Fortunately it was not an easy thing to tell one's mother. The incident, embarrassing as it   
was, marked a decided 
 
230 
 
change in our relations. I thought that the next time she came she would be severe with me,   
but on the contrary; she seemed to have dolled herself up, to have sprinkled more perfume   
 155 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over herself, and she was even a bit gay, which was unusual for Lola because she was a   
morose, withdrawn type. I didn't dare to open my fly again, but I would get an erection and   
hold it throughout the lesson, which she must have enjoyed because she was always stealing   
sidelong    glances    in    that    direction.    I    was    only    fifteen    at    the    time,    and    she    was    easily   
twenty-five or twenty-eight. It was difficult for me to know what to do, unless it was to   
deliberately knock her down one day while my mother was out. For a time I actually shadowed   
her at night, when she went out alone. She had a habit of going out for long walks alone in   
the evening. I used to dog her steps, hoping she would get to some deserted spot near the   
cemetery where I might try some rough tactics. I had a feeling sometimes that she knew I   
was following her and that she enjoyed it. I think she was waiting for me to waylay her - I   
think that was what she wanted. Anyway, one night I was lying in the grass near the   
railroad tracks; it was a sweltering summer's night and people were lying about anywhere   
and everywhere, like panting dogs. I wasn't thinking of Lola at all - I was just mooning   
there,    too    hot    to    think    about    anything.    Suddenly    I    see    a    woman    coming    along    the    narrow   
cinderpath. I'm lying sprawled out on the embankment and nobody around that I can notice.   
The woman is coming along slowly, head down, as though she were dreaming. As she gets close   
I recognize her. "Lola!" I call. "Lola!" She seems to be really astonished to see me there.   
"Why, what are you doing here?" she says, and with that she sits down beside me on the   
embankment. I didn't bother to answer her, I didn't say a word -1 just crawled over her and   
flattened her. "Not here, please," she begged, but I paid no attention. I got my hand   
between her legs, all tangled up in that thick sporran others, and she was sopping wet,   
like a horse salivating. It was my first fuck, be Jesus, and it had to be that a train   
would come along and shower hot sparks over us. Lola was terrified. It was her first fuck   
too, I guess, and she probably needed it more than I, but when she felt the sparks 
 
231 
 
she wanted to tear loose. It was like trying to hold down a wild mare. I couldn't keep her   
down, no matter how I wrestled with her. She got up, shook herclothes down, and adjusted   
the bun at the nape of her neck. "You must go home," she says. "I'm not going home," I   
said, and with that I took her by the arm and started walking. We walked along in dead   
silence    for    quite    a    distance.    Neither    of    us    seemed    to    be    noticing    where    we    were    going.   
Finally we were out on the highway and up above us were the reservoirs and near the   
reservoirs was a pond. Instinctively I headed towards the pond. We had to pass under some   
low-hanging trees as we neared the pond. I was helping Lola to stoop down when suddenly she   
slipped, dragging me with her. She made no effort to get up; instead, she caught hold of me   
and pressed me to her, and to my complete amazement I also felt her slip her hand in my   
fly. She caressed me so wonderfully that in a jiffy I came in her hand. Then she took my   
hand and put it between her legs. She lay back completely relaxed and opened her legs wide.   
I bent over and kissed every hair on her cunt; I put my tongue in her navel and licked it   
clean. Then I lay with my head between her legs and lapped up the drool that was pouring   
from her. She was moaning now and clutching wildly with her hands; her hair had come   
completely undone and was lying over her bare abdomen. To make it short, I got it in again,   
and I held it a long time, for which she must have been damned grateful because she came I   
 156 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
don't know how many times - it was like a pack of firecrackers going off, and with it all   
she sunk her teeth into me, bruised my lips, clawed me, ripped my shirt and what the hell   
not. I was branded like a steer when I got home and took a look at myself in the mirror. 
 
It was wonderful while it lasted, but it didn't last long. A month later the Niessens moved   
to another city, and I never saw Lola again. But I hung her sporran over the bed and I   
prayed to it every night. And whenever I began the Czemy stuff I would get an erection,   
thinking of Lola lying in the grass, thinking of her long black hair, the bun at the nape   
of her neck, the groans she vented and the juice that poured out of her. Playing the piano   
was just one long vicarious fuck for me. I 
 
232 
 
had to wait another two years before I would get my end in again, as they say, and then it   
wasn't so good because I got a beautiful dose with it, and besides it wasn't in the grass   
and it wasn't summer, and there was no heat in it but just a cold mechanical fuck for a   
buck in a dirty little hotel room, the bastard trying to pretend she was coming and not   
coming any more than Christmas was coming. And maybe it wasn't her that gave me the clap,   
but her pal in the next room who was lying up with my friend Simmons. It was like this - I   
had finished so quick with my mechanical fuck that I thought I'd go in and see how it was   
going with my friend Simmons. Lo and behold, they were still at it, and they were going   
strong. She was a Czech, his girl, and a bit sappy; she hadn't been at it very long,   
apparently, and she used to forget herself and enjoy the act. Watching her hand it out, I   
decided to wait and have a go at her myself. And so I did. And before the week was out I   
had a discharge, and after that I figured it would be blueballs or rocks in the groin. 
 
Another year or so and I was giving lessons myself, and as luck would have it, the mother   
of the girl I'm teaching is a slut, a tramp and a trollop if ever there was one. She was   
living with a nigger, as I later found out. Seems she couldn't get a prick big enough to   
satisfy her. Anyway, every time I started to go home she'd hold me up at the door and rub   
it up against me. I was afraid of starting in with her because rumour had it that she was   
full of syph, but what the hell are you going to do when a hot bitch like that plasters her   
cunt up against you and slips her tongue halfway down your throat. I used to fuck her   
standing up in the vestibule, which wasn't so difficult because she was light and I could   
hold her in my hand like a doll. And like that I'm holding her one night when suddenly I   
hear a key being fitted into the lock, and she hears it too and she's frightened stiff.   
There's nowhere to go. Fortunately there's a portiere hanging at the doorway and I hide   
behind that. Then I heard her black buck kissing her and saying    how are yer, honey ?    and   
she's saying how she had been waiting up for him and better come right upstairs because she   
can't wait and so on. And when the stairs stop squeaking I gently open the door and 
 
233 
 
sally out, and then by God I have a real fright because if that black buck ever finds out   
 157 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I'll have my throat slit and no mistake about it. And so I stop giving lessons at that   
joint, but soon the daughter is after me - just turning sixteen - and won't I come and give   
her lessons at a friend's house? We begin the Czerny exercises all over again, sparks and   
everything. It's the first smell of fresh cunt I've had, and it's wonderful, like new-mown   
hay. We fuck our way through one lesson after another and in between lessons we do a little   
extra fucking. And then one day it's the sad story - she's knocked up and what to do about   
it? I have to get a Jewboy to help me out, and he wants twenty-five bucks for the job and   
I've never seen twenty-five bucks in my life. Besides, she's under age. Besides, she might   
have blood-poisoning. I give him five bucks on account and beat it to the Adirondacks for a   
couple of weeks. In the Adirondacks I meet a schoolteacher who's dying to take lessons.   
More velocity exercises, more condoms and conundrums. Every time I touched the piano I   
seemed to shake a cunt loose. 
 
If there was a party I had to bring the fucking music roll along; to me it was just like   
wrapping my penis in a handkerchief and slinging it under my arm. In vacation time, at a   
farmhouse or an inn, where there was always a surplus of cunt, the music had an   
extraordinary effect. Vacation rime was a period I looked forward to the whole year, not   
because of the cunts so much as because it meant no work. Once out of harness I became a   
down. I was so chock-full of energy that I wanted to jump out of my skin. I remember one   
summer in the Catskills meeting a girl named Francie. She was beautiful and lascivious,   
with strong Scotch teats and a row of white even teeth that was dazzling. It began in the   
river where we were swimming. We were holding on to the boat and one of her boobies had   
slipped out of bounds. I slipped the other one out for her and then I undid the shoulder   
straps. She ducked under the boat coyly and I followed and as she was coming up for air I   
wriggled the bloody bathing suit off her and there she was floating like a mermaid with her   
big strong teats bobbing up and down like bloated corks. I wriggled out of my tights and we   
began playing like dolphins under the side of the 
 
234 
 
boat. In a little while her girl friend came along in a canoe. She was a rather hefty girl   
a sort of strawberry blonde with agate-coloured eyes and full of freckles. She was rather   
shocked to find us in the raw, but we soon tumbled her out of the canoe and stripped her.   
And then the three of us began to play tag under the water, but it was hard to get anywhere   
with them because they were slippery as eels. After we had had enough of it we ran to a   
little bath-house which was standing in the field like an abandoned sentry box. We had   
brought our clothes along and we were going to get dressed, the three of us, in this little   
box. It was frightfully hot and sultry and the clouds were gathering for a storm. Agnes -   
that was Francie's friend - was in a hurry to get dressed. She was beginning to be ashamed   
of herself standing there naked in front of us. Francie, on the other hand seemed to be   
perfectly at ease. She was sitting on the bench with her legs crossed and smoking a   
cigarette. Anyway, just as Agnes was pulling on her chemise there came a flash of lightning   
and a terrifying clap of thunder right on the heels of it. Agnes screamed and dropped her   
chemise. There came another flash in a few seconds and again a peal of thunder, dangerously   
 158 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dose. The air got blue all around us and the flies began to bite and we felt nervous and   
itchy and a bit panicky too. Especially Agnes who was afraid of the lightning and even more   
afraid of being found dead and three of us stark naked. She wanted to get her things on and   
run for the house, she said. And just as she got that off her chest the rain came down, in   
bucketsful. We thought it would stop in a few minutes and so we stood there naked looking   
out at the steaming river through the partly opened door. It seemed to be raining rocks and   
the lightning kept playing around us incessantly. We were all thoroughly frightened now and   
in a quandary as to what to do. Agnes was wringing her hands and praying out loud; she   
looked like a George Grosz idiot, one of those lopsided bitches with a rosary around the   
neck and yellow jaundice to boot. I thought she was going to faint on us or something.   
Suddenly I got the bright idea of doing a war-dance in the rain - to distract them. Just as   
I jump out to commence my shindig a streak of lightning flashes and splits 
 
235 
 
open a tree not far off. I'm so damned scared that I lose my wits. Always when I'm   
frightened I laugh. So I laughed a wild, blood-curdling laugh which made the girls scream.   
When I heard them scream, I don't know why, but I thought of the velocity exercises and   
with that I felt that I was standing in the void and it was blue all around and the rain   
was beating a bot-and-cold tattoo on my tender flesh. All my sensations had gathered on the   
surface of the skin and underneath the outermost layer of skin I was empty, light as a   
feather, lighter than air or smoke or talcum or magnesium or any goddamned thing you want.   
Suddenly I was a Chippewa and it was the key of sassafras again and I didn't give a fuck   
whether the girls were screaming or fainting or shitting in their pants, which they were   
minus anyway. Looking at crazy Agnes with the rosary around her neck and her big bread- 
basket blue with fright I got the notion to do a sacrilegious dance, with one hand cupping   
my balls and the other hand thumbing my nose at the thunder and lightning. The rain was hot   
and cold and the grass seemed full of dragonflies. I hopped about like a kangaroo and I   
yelled at the top of my lungs - "0 Father, you wormy old son of a bitch, pull in that   
fucking lightning or Agnes won't believe in you any more! Do you hear me, you old prick up   
there, stop the shenanigans . . . you're driving Agnes nutty. Hey you, are you deaf, you   
old    futzer?"    And    with    a    continuous    rattle    of    this    defiant    nonsense    on    my    lips    I    danced   
around the bath-house leaping and bounding like a gazelle and using the most frightful   
oaths I could summon. When the lightning cracked I jumped higher and when the thunder   
clapped I roared like a lion and then I did a handspring and then I rolled in the grass   
like a cub and I chewed the grass and spit it out for them and I pounded my chest like a   
gorilla and all the time I could see the Czerny exercises resting on the piano, the white   
page full of sharps and flats, and the fucking idiot, think I to myself, imagining that   
that's the way to learn how to manipulate the well-tempered clavichord. And suddenly I   
thought that Czemy might be in heaven by now and looking down on me and so I spat at him   
high as I could spit and when the thunder rolled again I yelled with  
 
236 
 
 
 
 159 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
all my might - "You bastard, Czerny,    you    up there, may the lightning twist your balls   
off. .. may you swallow your own crooked tail and strangle yourself... do you hear me, you   
crazy prick?" 
 
But in spite of all my good efforts Agnes was getting more delirious. She was a dumb Irish   
Catholic and she had never heard God spoken to that way before. Suddenly, while 1 was   
dancing about in the rear of the bath-house she bolted for the river. I heard Francie   
scream - "Bring her back, she'll drown herself! Bring her back!" I started after her, the   
rain still coming down like pitchforks, and yelling to her to come back, but she ran on   
blindly as though possessed of the devil, and when she got to the water's edge she dove   
straight in and made for the boat. I swam after her and as we got to the side of the boat,   
which I was afraid she would capsize, I got hold of her round the waist with my one hand   
and I started to talk to her calmly and soothingly, as though I were talking to a child.   
"Go away from me," she said, "you're an atheist!" Jesus, you could have knocked me over   
with a feather, so astonished I was to hear that. So that was it? All that hysteria because   
I was insulting the Lord Almighty. I felt like batting her one in the eye to bring her to   
her senses. But we were out over our heads and I had a fear that she would do some mad   
thing like pulling the boat over our heads if I didn't handle her right. So I pretended   
that I was terribly sorry and I said I didn't mean a word of it, that I had been scared to   
death, and so on and so forth, and as I talked to her gently, soothingly, I slipped my hand   
down from her waist and I gently stroked her ass. That was what she wanted all right. She   
was talking to me blubberingly about what a good Catholic she was and how she had tried not   
to sin, and maybe she was so wrapped up in what she was saying that she didn't know what I   
was doing, but just the same when I got my hand in her crotch and said all the beautiful   
things I could think of, about God, about love, about going to church and confessing and   
all that crap, she must have felt something because I had a good three fingers inside her   
and working them around like drunken bobbins. "Put your arms around me Agnes," I said   
softly, slipping my 
 
237 
 
band out and pulling her to me so that I could get my legs between hers... "There, that's   
the girl... take it easy now... it'll stop soon." And still talking about the church, the   
confessional. God love, and the whole bloody mess I managed to get it inside her. "You're   
very good to me," she said, just as though she didn't know my prick was in her, "and I'm   
sorry I acted like a fool." "I know, Agnes," I said, "it's all right... listen, grab me   
tighter... yeah, that's it." "I'm afraid the boat's going to tip over," she says, trying   
her best to keep her ass in position by paddling with her right hand. "Yes, let's get back   
to the shore," I said, and I start to pull away from her. "Oh don't leave me," she says,   
clutching me tighter. "Don't leave me, I'll drown." Just then Francie comes running down to   
the water. "Hurry," says Agnes, "hurry ... I'll drown." 
 
Francie was a good sort, I must say. She certainly wasn't a Catholic and if she had any   
morals they were of the reptilian order. She was one of those girls who are born to fuck.   
 160 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
She had no aims, no great desires, showed no jealousy, held no grievances, was constantly   
cheerful and not at all unintelligent. At nights when we were sitting on the porch in the   
dark talking to the guests she would come over and sit on my lap with nothing on underneath   
her dress and I would slip it into her as she laughed and talked to the others. I think she   
would have brazened it out before the Pope if she had been given a chance. Back in the   
city,    when I    called on    her at    her home,    she pulled    the same    stunt off    in front    of her   
mother whose sight, fortunately, was growing dim. If we went dancing and she got too hot in   
the pants she would drag me to a telephone booth and, queer girl that she was, she'd   
actually talk to some one, some one like Agnes for example, while pulling off the trick.   
She seemed to get a special pleasure out of doing it under people's noses; she said there   
was more fun in it if you didn't think about it too hard. In the crowded subway coming home   
from the beach, say, she'd slip her dress around so that the slit was in the middle and   
take my hand and put it right on her cunt. If the train was tightly packed and we were   
safely wedged in a comer she'd take my cock out of my fly and hold it in her two 
 
238 
 
hands, as though it were a bird. Sometimes she'd get playful and hang her bag on it, as   
though to prove that there wasn't the least danger. Another thing about her was that she   
didn't pretend that I was the only guy she had on the string. Whether she told me   
everything I don't know, but she certainly told me plenty. She told me about her affairs   
laughingly, while she was climbing over me or when I had it in her, or just when I was   
about to come. She would tell me how they went about it, how big they were or how small,   
what they said when they got excited and so on and so forth giving me every possible   
detail, just as though I were going to write a textbook on the subject. She didn't seem to   
have the least feeling of sacredness about her own body or her feelings or anything   
connected with herself. "Francie, you bloody fucker," I used to say, "you've got the morals   
of a clam." "But you like me, don't you?" she'd answer. "M en like to fuck, and so do women.   
It doesn't harm anybody and it doesn't mean you have to love every one you fuck does it? I   
wouldn't want to be in love; it must be terrible to have to fuck the same man all the time,   
don't you think? Listen, if you didn't fuck anybody but me all the time you'd get tired of   
me quick, wouldn't you? Sometimes it's nice to be fucked by someone you don't know at all.   
Yes, I think that's the best of all," she added - "there's no complications, no telephone   
numbers, no love letters, no scraps, what? Listen, do you think this is very bad? Once I   
tried to get my brother to fuck me; you know what a sissy he is - he gives everybody a   
pain. I don't remember exactly how it was any more, but anyway we were in the house alone   
and I was passionate that day. He came into my bedroom to ask me for something. I was lying   
there with my dress up, thinking about it and wanting it terribly, and when he came in I   
didn't give a damn about his being my brother, I just thought of him as a man, and so I lay   
there with my skirt up and I told him I wasn't feeling well, that I had a pain in my   
stomach. He wanted to run right out and get something for me but I told him no, just to rub   
my stomach a bit, that would do it good. I opened my waist and made him rub my bare skin.   
He was trying to keep his eyes on the wall, the big idiot, and rubbing me as 
 
 
 
 161 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
239 
 
though I were a piece of wood. 'It's not there, you chump,' I said, 'it's lower down . . .   
what are you afraid of?' And I pretended that I was in agony. Finally he touched me   
accidentally. "There! that's it!' I shouted. 'Oh do rub it, it feels so good!' Do you know,   
the big sap actually massaged me for five minutes without realizing that it was all a game?   
I was so exasperated that I told him to get the hell out and leave me alone. 'You're a   
eunuch,' I said, but he was such a sap I don't think he knew what the word meant." She   
laughed, thinking what a ninny her brother was. She said he probably still had his maiden.   
What did I think about it - was it so terribly bad? Of course she knew I wouldn't think   
anything of the kind. "Listen Francie," I said, "did you ever tell that story to the cop   
you're going with?" She guessed she hadn't. "I guess so too," I said. "He'd beat the piss   
out of you if ever he heard that yam." "He's socked me already," she answered promptly.   
"What?"    I said, "you let him beat you up?" "I don't ask him to," she said, "but you know   
how quick-tempered he is. I don't let anybody else sock me but somehow coming from him I   
don't mind so much. Sometimes it makes me feel good inside ... I don't know, maybe a woman   
ought to get beaten up once in a while. It doesn't hurt so much, if you really like a guy.   
And afterwards he's so damned gentle - I almost feel ashamed of myself..." 
 
It isn't often you get a cunt who'll admit such things - I mean a regular cunt and not a   
moron. There was Trix Miranda, for example, and her sister, Mrs. Costello. A fine pair of   
birds they were. Trix, who was going with my friend M acGregor, tried to pretend to her own   
sister, with whom she was living, that she had no sexual relations with M acGregor. And the   
sister was pretending to all and sundry that she was frigid, that she couldn't have any   
relations with a man even if she wanted to, because she was "built too small". And   
meanwhile my friend MacGregor was fucking them silly, both of them, and they both knew   
about each other but still they lied like that to each other. Why? I couldn't make it out.   
The Costello bitch was hysterical; whenever she felt that she wasn't getting a fair   
percentage of the lays that MacGregor was handing out she'd 
 
240 
 
throw a pseudo-epileptic fit. That meant throwing towels over her, patting her wrists,   
opening her bosom, chafing her legs and finally hoisting her upstairs to bed where my   
friend MacGregor would look after her as soon as he had put the other one to sleep.   
Sometimes the two sisters would lie down together to take a nap of an afternoon; if   
MacGregor were around he would go upstairs and lie between them. And he explained it to me   
laughingly, the trick was for him to pretend to go to sleep. He would lie there breathing   
heavily, opening now one eye, now the other, to see which one was really dozing off. As   
soon as he was convinced that one of them was asleep    he'd    tackle the other. On such   
occasions he seemed to prefer the hysterical sister, Mrs. Costello, whose husband visited   
her about once every six months. The more risk he ran, the more thrill he got out of it, he   
said. If it were with the other sister, Trix, whom he was supposed to be courting, he had   
to pretend that it would be terrible if the other one were to catch them like that, and at   
 162 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same time, he admitted to me, he was always hoping that the other one would wake up and   
catch them. But the married sister, the one who was "built too small", as she used to say,   
was a wily bitch and besides she felt guilty toward her sister and if her sister had ever   
caught her in the act she'd probably have pretended that she was having a fit and didn't   
know what she was doing. Nothing on earth could make her admit that she was actually   
permitting herself the pleasure of being fucked by a man. 
 
I knew her quite well because I was giving her lessons for a time, and I used to do my   
damnedest to make her admit that she had a normal cunt and that she'd enjoy a good fuck if   
she could get it now and then. I used to tell her wild stories, which were really thinly   
disguised accounts of her own doings, and yet she remained adamant. I had even gotten her   
to the point one day - and this beats everything - where she let me put my finger inside   
her. I thought sure it was settled. It's true she was dry and a bit tight, but I put that   
down to her hysteria. But imagine getting that far with a cunt and then having her say to   
your face, as she yanks her dress down violently - "you see, I told you I wasn't built   
right!" "I don't see anything of 
 
241 
 
the kind," I said angrily. "What do you expect me to do - use a microscope on you?" 
 
"I like that," she said, pretending to get on her high horse. "What a way of talking to   
me!" 
"You    know    damned    well    you're    lying,"    I    continued.    "Why    do    you    lie    like    that?    Don't    you   
think it's human to have a cunt and to use it once in a while? Do you want it to dry up on   
you?" 
"Such language!" she said, biting her under lip and reddening like a beet "I always thought   
you were a gentleman." 
"Well, you're no lady," I retorted, "because even a lady admits to a fuck now and then, and   
besides ladies don't ask gentlemen to stick their fingers up inside them and see how small   
they're built." 
"I never asked you to touch me," she said. "I wouldn't think of asking you to put your hand   
on me, on my private parts anyway." 
"Maybe you thought I was going to swab your ear for you, is that it?" 
"I thought of you like a doctor at that moment, that's all I can say," she said stiffly,   
trying to freeze me out. 
"Listen,"    I    said,    taking    a    wild    chance,    "let's    pretend    that    it    was    all    a    mistake,    that   
nothing happened, nothing at all. I know you too well to think of insulting you like that.   
I wouldn't think of doing a thing like that to you - no, damned if I would. I was just   
wondering if maybe you weren't right in what you said, if maybe you aren't built rather   
small. You know, it all went so quick I couldn't tell what I felt... I don't think I even   
put my finger inside you. I must have just touched the outside - that's about all. Listen   
sit down here on the couch ... let's be friends again." I pulled her down beside me - she   
was melting visibly - and I put my arm around her waist, as though to console her more   
 163 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tenderly. "Has it always been like that?" I asked innocently, and I almost laughed the next   
moment, realizing what an idiotic question it was. She hung her head coyly, as though we   
were touching on an unmentionable tragedy. "Listen, maybe if you sat on my lap . . ." and I   
hoisted her gently on to my lap, at the same time delicately  
 
242 
 
putting my hand under her dress and resting it lightly on her knee . . . "maybe if you sat   
a moment like this, you'd feel better... there, that's it, just snuggle back in my arms...   
are you feeling better?" She didn't answer, but she didn't resist either; she just lay back   
limply and closed her eyes. Gradually and very gently and smoothly I moved my hand up her   
leg, talking to her in a low, soothing voice all the time. When I got my fingers into her   
crotch and parted the little lips she was as moist as a dish-rag. I massaged it gently,   
opening it up more and more, and still handing out a telepathic line about women sometimes   
being mistaken about themselves and how sometimes they think they're very small when really   
they're quite normal, and the longer I kept it up the juicier she got and the more she   
opened up. I had four fingers inside her and there was room inside for more if I had had   
more to put in. She had an enormous cunt and it had been well reamed out, I could feel. I   
looked at her to see if she was still keeping her eyes shut. Her mouth was open and she was   
gasping but her eyes were tight shut, as though she were pretending to herself that it was   
all a dream. I could move her about roughly now - no danger of the slightest protest. And   
maliciously perhaps, I jostled her about unnecessarily, just to see if she would come to.   
She was as limp as a feather pillow and even when her head struck the arm of the sofa she   
showed no sign of irritation. It was as though she had anaesthetized herself for a   
gratuitous fuck. I pulled all her clothes off and threw them on the floor, and after I had   
given her a bit of a work-out on the sofa I slipped it out and laid her on the floor, on   
her clothes; and then I slipped it in again and she held it tight with that suction valve   
she used so skilfully, despite the outward appearance of coma. 
 
It seems strange to me that the music always passed off into sex. Nights, if I went out for   
a walk, I was sure to pick up some one - a nurse, a girl coming out of a dance hall; a   
sales girl, anything with a skirt on. If I went out with my friend M acGregor in his car -   
just a little spin to the beach, he would say -1 would find myself by midnight sitting in   
some 
 
243 
 
strange parlour in some queer neighbourhood with a girl on my lap, usually one I didn't   
give a damn about because MacGregor was even less selective than I. Often, stepping in his   
car I'd say to him - "listen, no cunts tonight, what?" And he'd say - "Jesus, no, I'm fed   
up ... just a little drive somewhere . . . maybe to Sheepshead Bay, what do you say?" We   
wouldn't have gone more than a mile when suddenly he'd pull the car up to the curb and   
nudge me. "Get a look at that," he'd say, pointing to a girl strolling along the sidewalk.   
"Jesus, what a leg!" Or else - "Listen what do you say we ask her to come along? M aybe she   
 164 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can dig up a friend." And before I could say another word he'd be hailing her and handing   
out his usual patter, which was the same for every one. And nine times out often the girl   
came along. And before we'd gone very far, feeling her up with his free hand, he'd ask her   
if she didn't have a friend she could dig up to keep us company. And if she put up a fuss,   
if she didn't like being pawed over that way too quickly, he'd say - "All right, get the   
hell out then ... we can't waste any time on the likes of you!" And with that he'd slow up   
and shove her out. "We can't be bothered with cunts like that, can we Henry?" he'd say,   
chuckling softly. "You wait, I promised you something good before the night's over." And if   
I reminded him that we were going to lay off for one night he'd answer; "Well, just as you   
like ... I was only thinking it might make it more pleasant for you." And then suddenly the   
brakes would pull us up and he'd be saying to some silky silhouette looming out of the   
dark: - "hello sister, what yer doing - taking a little stroll?" And maybe this time it   
would be something exciting, a dithery little bitch with nothing else to do but pull up her   
skirt and hand it to you. M aybe we wouldn't even have to buy her a drink, just hail up   
somewhere on a side road and go at it, one after the other, in the car. And if she was an   
emptyheaded bimbo, as they usually were, he wouldn't even bother to drive her home. "We're   
not going that way," he'd say, the bastard that he was. "You'd better jump out here," and   
with that he'd open the door and out with her. His next thought was, of course, was she   
dean? That would occupy his mind all the 
 
244 
 
way back. "Jesus, we ought to be more careful," he'd say. "You don't know what you're   
getting yourself into picking them up like that. Ever since that last one - you remember,   
the one we picked up on the Drive - I've been itchy as hell. Maybe it's just   
nervousness ... I think about it too much. Why can't a guy stick to one cunt, tell me that.   
Henry. You take Trix, now, she's a good kid, you know that. And I like her too, in a way,   
but... shit, what's the use of talking about it? You know me - I'm a glutton. You know, I'm   
getting so bad that sometimes when I'm on my way to a date - mind you, with a girl I want   
to fuck, and everything fixed too - as I say, sometimes I'm rolling along and maybe out of   
the comer of my eye I catch a flash of a leg crossing the street and before I know it I've   
got her in the car and the hell with the other girl. I must be cunt-struck, I guess ...   
what do you think? Don't tell me," he would add quickly. "I know you, you bugger . . .   
you'll be sure to tell me the worst." And then, after a pause - "you're a funny guy, do you   
know that? I never notice you refusing anything, but somehow you don't seem to be worrying   
about it all the time. Sometimes you strike me as though you didn't give a damn one way or   
the other. And you're a steady bastard too - almost a monogamist, I'd say. How you can keep   
it up so long with one woman beats me. Don't you get bored with them? Jesus, I know so well   
what they're going to say. Sometimes I feel like saying . . . you know, just breeze in on   
'em and say; 'listen, kid, don't say a word .. . just fish it out and open your legs wide.'   
" He laughed heartily. "Can you imagine the expression on Trix's face if I pulled a line   
like that on her? I'll tell you, once I came pretty near doing it. I kept my hat and coat   
on. Was she sore! She didn't mind my keeping the coat on so much, but the hat! I told her I   
was afraid of a draught... of course there wasn't any draught. The truth is, I was so   
 165 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
damned impatient to get away that I thought if I kept my hat on I'd be off quicker. Instead   
I was there all night with her. She put up such a row that I couldn't get her quiet. . .   
But listen, that's nothing. Once I had a drunken Irish bitch and this one had some queer   
ideas. In the first place, she never wanted it in bed . . . always on the table. You know,   
that's 
 
245 
 
all right once in a while, but if you do it often it wears you out. So one night - I was a   
little tight, I guess - I says to her, no, nothing doing, you drunken bastard . . . you're   
gonna go to bed with me to-night. I want a real fuck -    in bed.    You know, I had to argue   
with that son of a bitch for an hour almost before I could persuade her to go to bed with   
me, and then only on the agreement that I was to keep my hat on. Listen, can you picture me   
getting over that stupid bitch with my hat on? And stark naked to boot! I asked her ...   
'Why do you want me to keep my hat on?' You know what she said? She said it seemed more   
genteel. Can you imagine what a mind that cunt had? I used to hate myself for going with   
that bitch. I never went to her sober, that's one thing. I'd have to be tanked up first and   
kind of blind and batty - you know how I get sometimes . . ." 
 
I knew very well what he meant. He was one of my oldest friends and one of the most   
cantankerous bastards I ever knew. Stubborn wasn't the word for it. He was like a mule - a   
pigheaded Scotchman. And his old man was even worse. When the two of them got into a rage   
it was a pretty sight. The old man used to dance positively    dance    with rage. If the old   
lady got between she'd get a sock in the eye. They used to put him out of the house   
regularly. Out he'd go, with all his belongings, including the furniture, including the   
piano too. In a month or so he'd be back again - because they always gave him credit at   
home. And then he'd come home drunk some night with a woman he'd picked up somewhere and   
the rumpus would start all over again. It seems they didn't mind so much his coming home   
with a girl and keeping her all night, but what they did object to was the cheek of him   
asking his mother to serve them breakfast in bed. If his mother tried to bawl him out he'd   
shut her up by saying - "What are you trying to tell me? You wouldn't have been married yet   
if you hadn't been knocked up." The old lady would wring her hands and say - "What a son!   
What a son! God help me, what have I done to deserve this?" To which he'd remark, "Aw   
forget it! You're just an old prune!" Often as not his sister would come up to try and   
smooth matters out. "Jesus, Wallie," she'd say, 
 
246 
 
"it's none of my business what you do, but can't you talk to your mother more   
respectfully?" Whereupon MacGregor would make his sister sit on the bed and start coaxing   
her to bring up the breakfast. Usually he'd have to ask his bed-mate what her name was in   
order to present her to his sister. "She's not a bad kid," he'd say, referring to his   
sister. "She's the only decent one in the family ... Now listen, sis, bring up some grub,   
will yer? Some nice bacon and eggs, eh, what do you say? Listen, is the old man around?   
 166 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What's his mood to-day? I'd like to borrow a couple of bucks. You try to worm it out of   
him, will you? I'll get you something nice for Christmas." Then, as though everything were   
settled, he'd pull back the covers to expose the wench beside him. "Look at her, sis, ain't   
she beautiful? Look at that leg! Listen, you ought to get yourself a man . . . you're too   
skinny. Patsy here, I bet she doesn't go begging for it, eh Patsy?" and with that a sound   
slap on the rump for Patsy. "Now scram, sis, I want some coffee . . . and don't forget,   
make the bacon crisp! Don't get any of that lousy store bacon ... get something extra. And   
be quick about it!" 
 
What I liked about him were his weaknesses; like all men who practise will-power he was   
absolutely flabby inside. There wasn't a thing he wouldn't do - out of weakness. He was   
always very busy and he was never really doing anything. And always boning up on something,   
always trying to improve his mind. For example, he would take the unabridged dictionary   
and, tearing out a page each day, would read it through religiously on his way back and   
forth from the office. He was full of facts, and the more absurd and incongruous the facts,   
the more pleasure he derived from them. He seemed to be bent on proving to all and sundry   
that life was a farce, that it wasn't worth the game, that one thing cancelled out another,   
and so on. He was brought up on the North Side, not very far from the neighbourhood in   
which I had spent my childhood. He was very much a product of the North Side, too, and that   
was one of the reasons why I liked him. The way he talked, out of the comer of his mouth,   
for instance, the tough air he put on when talking to a cop, the way he spat in disgust,   
the 
 
247 
 
peculiar curse words he used, the sentimentality, the limited horizon, the passion for   
playing pool or shooting crap, the staying up all night swapping yams, the contempt for the   
rich, the hobnobbing with politicians, the curiosity about worthless things, the respect   
for learning, the fascination of the dance hall, the saloon, the burlesque, talking about   
seeing the world and never budging out of the city, idolizing no matter whom so long as the   
person showed "spunk", a thousand and one little traits or peculiarities of this sort   
endeared him to me because it was precisely such idiosyncrasies which marked the fellows I   
had known as a child. The neighbourhood was composed of nothing, it seemed, but lovable   
failures. The grown-ups behaved like children and the children were incorrigible. Nobody   
could rise very far above his neighbour or he'd be lynched. It was amazing that any one   
ever became a doctor or a lawyer. Even so, he had to be a good fellow, had to pretend to   
talk like every one else, and he had to vote the Democratic ticket. To hear MacGregor talk   
about Plato or Nietzsche, for instance, to his buddies was something to remember. In the   
first place, to even get permission to talk about such things as Plato or Nietzsche to his   
companions, he had to pretend that it was only by accident that he had run across their   
names; or perhaps he'd say that he had met an interesting drunk one night in the back room   
of a saloon and this drunk had started talking about these guys Nietzsche and Plato. He   
would even pretend he didn't quite know how the names were pronounced. Plato wasn't such a   
dumb bastard, he would say apologetically. Plato had an idea or two in his bean, yes sir,   
 167 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
yes    siree.    He'd    like    to    see    one    of    those    dumb    politicians    at    Washington    trying    to    lock   
horns with a guy like Plato. And he'd go on, in this roundabout, matter of fact fashion to   
explain to his crap-shooting friends just what kind of a bright bird Plato was in his time   
and how he measured up against other men in other times. Of course, he was probably a   
eunuch, he would add, by way of throwing a little cold water on all this erudition. In   
those days, as he nimbly explained, the big guys, the philosophers, often had their nuts   
cut off - a fact! - so as to be out of all temptation. The other guy, Nietzsche, he was a   
real case, 
 
248 
 
a case for the bug-house. He was supposed to be in love with his sister. Hypersensitive   
like. Had to live in a special climate - in Nice, he thought it was. As a rule he didn't   
care much for the Germans, but this guy Nietzsche was different. As a matter of fact, he   
hated the Germans, this Nietzsche. He claimed he was a Pole or something like that. He had   
them dead right, too. He said they were stupid and swinish, and by God, he knew what he was   
talking about. Anyway he showed them up. He said they were full of shit, to make it brief,   
and by God, wasn't he right though? Did you see the way those bastards turned tail when   
they got a dose of their own medicine? "Listen, I know a guy who cleaned out a nestful of   
them in the Argonne region - he said they were so god-damned low he wouldn't shit on them.   
He said he wouldn't even waste a bullet on them - he just bashed their brains in with a   
dub. I forget this guy's name now, but anyway he told me he saw aplenty in the few months   
he was there. He said the best fun he got out of the whole fucking business was to pop off   
his own major. Not that he had any special grievance against him - he just didn't like his   
mug. He didn't like the way the guy gave orders. Most of the officers that were killed got   
it in the back, he said. Served them right, too, the pricks! He was just a lad from the   
North Side. I think he runs a pool room now down near Wallabout M arket. A quiet fellow,   
minds his own business. But if you start talking to him about the war he goes off the   
handle. He says he'd assassinate the President of the United States if they ever tried to   
start another war. Yeah, and he'd do it too, I'm telling you ... But shit, what was that I   
wanted to tell you about Plato? Oh yeah . .." 
 
When the others were gone he'd suddenly shift gears. "You don't believe in talking like   
that, do you?" he'd begin. I had to admit I didn't. "You're wrong," he'd continue. "You've   
got to keep in with people, you don't know when you may need one of these guys. You act on   
the assumption that you're free, independent! You act as though you were superior to these   
people. Well, that's where you make a big mistake. How do you know where you'll be five   
years from now, or even six months from now? You might be blind, you might be 
 
249 
 
run over by a truck, you might be put in the bug-house; you can't tell what's going to   
happen to you. Nobody can. You might be as helpless as a baby..." 
 
 
 
 
 168 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
"So what?" I would say. 
 
"Well, don't you think it would be good to have a friend when you need one? You might be so   
god-damned helpless you'd be glad to have some one help you across the street. You think   
these guys are worthless; you think I'm wasting my time with them. Listen, you never know   
what a man might do for you some day. Nobody gets anywhere alone..."  
 
He was touchy about my independence, what he called my indifference. If I was obliged to   
ask him for a little dough he was delighted. That gave him a chance to deliver a little   
sermon on friendship. "So you have to have money, too?" he'd say, with a big satisfied grin   
spreading all over his face. "So the poet has to eat too? Well, well... It's lucky you came   
to me. Henry me boy, because I'm easy with you, I know you, you heartless son of a bitch.   
Sure, what do you want? I haven't got very much, but I'll split it with you. That's fair   
enough, isn't it? Or do you think, you bastard, that maybe I ought to give you it all and   
go out and borrow something for myself? I suppose you want a    good    meal, eh? Ham and Eggs   
wouldn't be good enough, would it? I suppose you'd like me to drive you to the restaurant   
too, eh? Listen, get up from that chair a minute - I want to put a cushion under your ass.   
Well, well, so you're broke! Jesus, you're always broke -1 never remember seeing you with   
money in your pocket. Listen, don't you ever feel ashamed of yourself? You talk about those   
bums I hang out with . . . well listen, mister, those guys never come and bum me for a dime   
like you do. They've got more pride - they'd rather steal it than come and grub it off me.   
But    you,    shit, you're full of high-falutin' ideas, you want to reform the world and all   
that crap - you don't want to work for money, no, not you . . . you expect somebody to hand   
it to you on a silver platter. Huh! Lucky there's guys like me around that understand you.   
You need to get wise to yourself. Henry. You're dreaming. Everybody wants to eat, don't you   
know that? Most people are willing to work for it - they don't lie in bed 
 
250 
 
all day like you and then suddenly pull on their pants and run to the first friend at hand.   
Supposing I wasn't here, what would you have done? Don't answer... I know what you're going   
to say. But listen, you can't go on all your life like that. Sure you talk fine - it's a   
pleasure to listen to you. You're the only guy I know that I really enjoy talking to, but   
where's it going to get you? One of these days they'll lock you up for vagrancy. You're   
just a bum, don't you know that? You're not even as good as those other bums you preach   
about. Where are you when I'm in a jam? You can't be found. You don't answer my letters,   
you don't answer the telephone, you even hide sometimes when I come to see you. Listen, I   
know - you don't have to explain to me. I know you don't want to hear my stories all the   
time. But shit, sometimes I really have to talk to you. A fucking lot you care though. So   
long as you're out of the rain and putting another meal under your belt you're happy. You   
don't think about your friends - until you're desperate. That's no way to behave, is it ?   
Say no and I'll give you a buck. God-damn it. Henry, you're the only real friend I've got   
but you're a son of a bitch of a mucker if I know what I'm talking about. You're just a   
born good for nothing son of a bitch. You'd rather starve than turn your hand to something   
 169 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
useful..." 
 
Naturally I'd laugh and hold my hand out for the buck he had promised me. That would   
irritate him afresh. "You're ready to say anything aren't you, if only I give you the buck   
I promised you? What a guy! Talk about morals - Jesus, you've got the ethics of a   
rattlesnake. No, I'm not giving it to you yet, by Christ. I'm going to torture you a little   
more first. I'm going to make you earn this money, if I can. Listen what about shining my   
shoes - do that for me, will you? They'll never get shined if you don't do it now." I pick   
up the shoes and ask him for the brush. I don't mind shining his shoes, not in the least.   
But that too seems to incense him. "You're going to shine them, are you? Well by Jesus,   
that beats all hell. Listen, where's your pride - didn't you ever have any? And you're the   
guy that knows everything. It's amazing. You know so god-damned much that you have to shine   
your 
 
251 
 
friend's shoes to worm a meal out of him. A fine pickle! Here, you bastard, here's the   
brush! Shine the other pair too while you're at it." 
 
A pause. He's washing himself at the sink and humming a bit. Suddenly, in a bright,   
cheerful tone - "How is it out today, Henry? Is it sunny? Listen, I've got just the place   
for you. What do you say to scallops and bacon with a little tartare sauce on the side?   
It's a little joint down near the inlet. A day like today is just the day for scallops and   
bacon, eh what, Henry? Don't tell me you've got something to do ... if I haul you down   
there you've got to spend a little time with me, you know that, don't you? Jesus, I wish I   
had your disposition. You just drift along, from minute to minute. Sometimes I think you're   
a damned sight better off than any of us, even if you are a stinking son of a bitch and a   
traitor and a thief. When I'm with you the day seems to pass like a dream. Listen, don't   
you see what I mean when I say I've got to see you sometimes? I go nuts being all by myself   
all the time. Why do I go chasing around after cunt so much? Why do I play cards all night?   
Why do I hang out with those bums from the Point? I need to talk to some one, that's what."   
 
A little later at the bay, sitting out over the water, with a shot of rye in him and   
waiting for the sea food to be served up ... "Life's not so bad if you can do what you   
want, eh Henry? If I make a little dough I'm going to take a trip around the world - and   
you're coming along with me. Yes, though you don't deserve it, I'm going to spend some real   
money on you one day. I want to see how you'd act if I gave you plenty of rope. I'm going   
to give you the money, see... I won't pretend to lend it to you. We'll see what'll happen   
to your fine ideas when you have some dough in your pocket. Listen, when I was talking   
about Plato the other day I meant to ask you something: I meant to ask you if you ever read   
that yam of his about Atlands. Did you?    You did?    Well, what do you think of it? Do you   
think it was just a yam, or do you think there might have been a place like that once?"  
 
I didn't dare to tell him that I suspected there were hundreds and thousands of continents   
 170 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whose existence past or future we 
 
252 
 
hadn't even begun to dream about, so I simply said I thought it quite possible indeed that   
such a place as Atlanris might once have been. 
 
"Well, it doesn't matter much one way or the other, I suppose," he went on, "but I'll tell   
you what I think. I think there must have been a time like that once, a time when men were   
different. I can't believe that they always were the pigs they are now and have been for   
the last few thousand years. I think it's just possible that there was a time when men knew   
how to live, when they knew how to take it easy and to enjoy life. Do you know what drives   
me crazy? It's looking at my old man. Ever since he's retired he sits in front of the fire   
all day long and mopes. To sit there like a broken-down gorilla, that's what he slaved for   
all his life. Well shit, if I thought that was going to happen to me I'd blow my brains out   
now. Look around you ... look at the people we know ... do you know one that's worth while?   
What's all the fuss about, I'd like to know? We've got to live, they say. Why ? that's what   
I want to know. They'd all be a damned sight better off dead. They're all just so much   
manure. When the war broke out and I saw them go off to the trenches I said to myself good,   
maybe they'll come back with a little sense! A lot of them didn't come back, of course. But   
the others! - listen, do you suppose they got more    human,    more considerate? Not at all!   
They're all butchers at heart, and when they're up against it they squeal. They make me   
sick, the whole fucking lot of 'em. I see what they're like, bailing them out every day. I   
see it from both sides of the fence. On the other side it stinks even worse. Why, if I told   
you some of the things I knew about the judges who condemn these poor bastards you'd want   
to slug them. All you have to do is look at their faces. Yes sir. Henry, I'd like to think   
there was once a time when things were different. We haven't seen any real life - and we're   
not going to see any. This thing is going to last another few thousand years, if I know   
anything about it. You think I'm mercenary. You think I'm cuckoo to want to earn a lot of   
money, don't you? Well I'll tell you, I want to earn a little pile so that I can get my   
feet out of this muck. I'd go off and live with a nigger wench if I 
 
253 
 
could get away from this atmosphere. I've worked my balls off trying to get where I am,   
which isn't very far. I don't believe in work any more than you do -1 -was trained that   
way, that's all. If I could put over a deal, if I could swindle a pile out of one of these   
dirty bastards I'm dealing with, I'd do it with a dear conscience. I know a little too much   
about the law, that's the trouble. But I'll fool them yet, you'll see. And when I put it   
over I'll put it over big..." 
 
Another shot of rye as the sea food's coming along and he starts in again. "I meant that   
about taking you on a trip with me. I'm thinking about it seriously. I suppose you'll tell   
me you've got a wife and a kid to look after. Listen when are you going to break off with   
 171 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that battle-axe of yours? Don't you know that you've got to ditch her?" He begins to laugh   
softly. "Ho! Ho! To think that I was the one who picked her out for you! Did I ever think   
you'd be chump enough to get hitched up to her? I thought I was recommending you a nice   
piece of tail and you, you poor slob, you marry her. Ho ho! Listen to me. Henry, while   
you've got a little sense left: don't let that sour-balled puss muck up your life for you,   
do you get me? I don't care what you do or where you go. I'd hate to see you leave town ...   
I'd miss you, I'm telling you that frankly, but Jesus, if you have to go to Africa, beat   
it, get out of her clutches, she's no good    for    you. Sometimes when I get hold of a good   
cunt I think to myself now there's something nice for Henry - and I have in mind to   
introduce her to you, and then of course I forget. But Jesus, man, there's thousands of   
cunts in the world you get along with. To think that you had to pick on a mean bitch like   
that .. . Do you want more bacon? You'd better eat what you want now, you know there won't   
be any dough later. Have another drink, eh? Listen, if you try to run away from me to-day I   
swear I'll never lend you a cent... What was I saying? Oh yeah, about that screwy bitch you   
married. Listen, are you going to do it or not? Every time I see you you tell me you're   
going to run away, but you never do it. You don't think you're supporting her, I hope? She   
don't    need    you, you sap, don't you see that? She just wants to torture you. As for the   
kid... well, shit, if I were in your 
 
254 
 
boots I'd drown it. That sounds kind of mean, doesn't it, but you know what I mean. You're   
not a father. I don't know what the hell you are... I just know you're too god-damned good   
a fellow to be wasting your life on them. Listen, why don't you try to make something of   
yourself? You're young yet and you make a good appearance. Go off somewhere, way the hell   
on, and start all over again. If you need a little money I'll raise it for you. It's like   
throwing    it down    a sewer,    I know,    but I'll    do it    for you    just the    same. The    truth is.   
Henry, I like you a hell of a lot. I've taken more from you than I would from anybody in   
the world. I guess we have a lot in common, coming from the old neighbourhood. Funny I   
didn't know you in those days. Shit, I'm getting sentimental..."  
 
The day wore on like that, with lots to eat and drink, the sun out strong, a car to tote us   
around, cigars in between, dozing a little on the beach studying the cunts passing by,   
talking, laughing, singing a bit too - one of many, many days I spent like that with   
MacGregor. Days like that really seemed to make the wheel stop. On the surface it was jolly   
and happy go lucky; time passing like a sticky dream. But underneath it was fatalistic,   
premonitory, leaving me the next day morbid and restless. I knew very well I'd have to make   
a break some day; I knew very well I was pissing my time away. But I knew also that there   
was nothing I could do about it -    yet.    Something had to happen, something big, something   
that would sweep me off my feet. All I needed was a push, but it had to be some force   
outside my world that could give me the right push, that I was certain of. I couldn't eat   
my heart out, because it wasn't in my nature. All my life things had worked out all right -   
in the end.    It wasn't in the cards for me to exert myself. Something had to be left to   
Providence - in my case a whole lot. Despite all the outward manifestations of misfortune   
 172 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or mismanagement I knew that I was born with a silver spoon in my mouth. And with a double   
crown too. The external situation was bad, admitted - but what bothered me more was the   
internal situation. I was really afraid of myself, of my appetite, my curiosity, my   
flexibility, my permeability, my malleability, my geniality, my powers of adaptation. No 
 
255 
 
situation in itself could frighten me: I somehow always saw myself sitting pretty, sitting   
inside a buttercup, as it were and sipping the honey. Even if I were flung in jail I had a   
hunch I'd enjoy it. It was because I knew how not to resist, I suppose. Other people wore   
themselves out tugging and straining and pulling; my strategy was to float with the tide.   
What people did to me didn't bother me nearly so much as what they were doing to others or   
to themselves. I was really so damned well off inside that I had to take on the problems of   
the world. And that's why I was in a mess all the time. I wasn't synchronized with my own   
destiny,    so to    speak. I    was trying    to live    out the    world destiny.    If I    got home    of an   
evening, for instance, and there was no food in the house, not even for the kid, I would   
turn right around and go looking for the food. But what I noticed about myself, and that   
was what puzzled me, was that no sooner outside and hustling for the grub than I was back   
at the Weltanschauung again. I didn't think of food for us exclusively, I thought of food   
in general, food in all its stages, everywhere in the world at that hour, and how it was   
gotten and how it was prepared and what people did if they didn't have it and how maybe   
there was a way to fix it so that everybody would have it when they wanted it and no more   
time wasted on such an idiotically simple problem. I felt sorry for the wife and kid, sure,   
but also felt sorry for the Hottentots and the Australian Bushmen, not to mention the   
starving Belgians and the Turks and the Armenians. I felt sorry for the human race, for the   
stupidity of man and his lack of imagination. Missing a meal wasn't so terrible - it was   
the ghastly emptiness of the street that disturbed me profoundly. All those bloody houses,   
one like another, and all so empty and cheerless-looking. Fine paving stones under foot and   
asphalt in the middle of the street and beautifully-hideously-elegant brown-stone stoops to   
walk up, and yet a guy could walk about all day and all night on this expensive material   
and be looking for a crust of bread. That's what got me. The incongruousness of it. If one   
could only dash out with a dinner bell and yell "Listen, listen, people, I'm a guy what's   
hungry. Who wants shoes shined? Who wants the garbage brought out? Who wants 
 
256 
 
the drainpipes cleaned out?" If you could only go out in the street and put it to them dear   
like that. But no, you don't dare to open your trap. If you tell a guy in the street you're   
hungry you scare the shit out of him, he runs like hell. That's something I never   
understood. I don't understand it yet. The whole thing is so simple - you just say Yes when   
some one comes up to you. And if you can't say Yes you can take him by the arm and ask some   
other bird to help you out. Why you have to don a uniform and kill men you don't know, just   
to get that crust of bread, is a mystery to me. That's what I think about, more than about   
whose trap it's going down or how much it costs. Why should I give a fuck about what   
 173 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anything    costs    ?    I'm    here    to    live,    not    to    calculate.    And    that's    just    what    the    bastards   
don't want you to do - to live! They want you to spend your whole life adding up figures.   
That makes sense to them. That's reasonable. That's intelligent. If I were running the boat   
things wouldn't be so orderly perhaps, but it would be gayer, by Jesus! You wouldn't have   
to shit in your pants over trifles. Maybe there wouldn't be macadamized roads and   
streamlined cars and loudspeakers and gadgets of a million-billion varieties, maybe there   
wouldn't even be glass in the windows, maybe you'd have to sleep on the ground, maybe there   
wouldn't be French cooking and Italian cooking and Chinese cooking, maybe people would kill   
each other when their patience was exhausted and maybe nobody would stop them because there   
wouldn't be any jails or any cops or judges, and there certainly wouldn't be any cabinet   
ministers or legislatures because-there wouldn't be any goddamned laws to obey or disobey,   
and maybe it would take months and years to trek from place to place, but you wouldn't need   
a visa or a passport or a carte d'identite because you wouldn't be registered anywhere and   
you wouldn't bear a number and if you wanted to change your name every week you could do it   
because it wouldn't make any difference since you wouldn't own anything except what y ou   
could carry around with you and why would you want to own anything when everything would be   
free? During this period when I was drifting from door to door, 
 
257 
 
job to job, friend to friend, meal to meal, I did try nevertheless to rope off a little   
space for myself which might be an anchorage; it was more like a lifebuoy in the midst of a   
swift channel. To get within a mile of me was to hear a huge dolorous bell tolling. Nobody   
could see the anchorage - it was buried deep in the bottom of the channel. One saw me   
bobbing up and down on the surface, rocking gently sometimes or else swinging backwards and   
forwards agitatedly. What held me down safely was the big pigeon-holed desk which I put in   
the parlour. This was the desk which had been in the old man's tailoring establishment for   
the last fifty years, which had given birth to many bills and many groans, which had housed   
strange souvenirs in its compartments, and which finally I had filched from him when he was   
ill and away from the establishment; and now it stood in the middle of the floor in our   
lugubrious parlour on the third floor of a respectable brown-stone house in the dead centre   
of the most respectable neighbourhood in Brooklyn. I had to fight a tough battle to install   
it there, but I insisted that it be there in the midmost midst of the shebang. It was like   
putting a mastodon in the centre of a dentist's office. But since the wife had no friends   
to visit her and since my friends didn't give a fuck if it were suspended from the   
chandelier, I kept it in the parlour and I put all the extra chairs we bad around it in a   
big circle and then I sat down comfortably and I put my feet up on the desk and dreamed of   
what I would write if I could write. I had a spittoon alongside of the desk, a big brass   
one from the same establishment, and I would spit in it now and then to remind myself that   
it was there. All the pigeon-holes were empty and all the drawers were empty; there wasn't   
a thing on the desk or in it except a sheet of white paper on which I found it impossible   
to put so much as a pothook. 
 
When I think of the titanic efforts I made to canalize the hot lava which was bubbling   
 174 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inside me, the efforts I repeated thousands of times to bring the funnel into place and   
capture    a    word,    a    phrase, I think inevitably of the men of the old stone age. A hundred   
thousand, two hundred thousand years, three hundred thousand years to arrive at the idea of   
the paleolith. 
 
258 
 
A phantom struggle, because they weren't dreaming of such a thing as the paleolith. It came   
without effort, born of a second, a miracle you might say, except that everything which   
happens is miraculous. Things happen or they don't happen, that's all. Nothing is   
accomplished by sweat and struggle. Nearly everything which we call life is just insomnia,   
an agony because we've lost the habit of falling asleep. We don't know how to let go. We're   
like a Jack-in-the-box perched on top of a spring and the more we struggle the harder it is   
to get back in the box. 
 
I think if I had been crazy I couldn't have hit upon a better scheme to consolidate my   
anchorage than to install this Neanderthal object in the middle of the parlour. With my   
feet on the desk, picking up the current, and my spinal column snugly socketed in a thick   
leather cushion, I was in an ideal relation to the flotsam and jetsam which was whirling   
about me, and which, because they were crazy and part of the flux, my friends were trying   
to convince me was life. I remember vividly the first contact with reality that I got   
through my feet, so to speak. The million words or so which I had written, mind you, well   
ordered, well connected, were as nothing to me - crude ciphers from the old stone age -   
because the contact was through the head and the head is a useless appendage unless you're   
anchored in mid-channel deep in the mud. Everything I had written before was museum stuff,   
and most writing is still museum stuff and that's why it doesn't catch fire, doesn't   
inflame the world. I was only a mouthpiece for the ancestral race which was talking through   
me; even my dreams were not authentic, not bona fide Henry M iller dreams. To sit still and   
think one thought which would come up out of me, out of the lifebuoy, was a Herculean task.   
I didn't lack thoughts nor words nor the power of expression - I lacked something much more   
important: the lever which would shut off the juice. The bloody machine wouldn't stop, that   
was the difficulty. I was not only in the middle of the current but the current was running   
through me and I had no control over it whatever. 
 
I remember the day I brought the machine to a dead stop and how the other mechanism, the   
one that was signed with my own initials and which I had made with my own hands and 
 
259 
 
my own blood slowly began to function. I had gone to the theatre nearby to see a vaudeville   
show; it was the matinee and I had a ticket for the balcony. Standing on line in the lobby,   
I already experienced a strange feeling of consistency. It was as though I were   
coagulating, becoming a recognizable consistent mass of jelly. It was like the ultimate   
stage in the healing of a wound. I was at the height of normality, which is a very abnormal   
 175 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
condition. Cholera might come and blow its foul breath in my mouth - it wouldn't matter. I   
might bend over and kiss the ulcers of a leprous hand, and no harm could possibly come to   
me. There was not just a balance in this constant warfare between health and disease, which   
is all that most of us may hope for, but there was a plus integer in the blood which meant   
that, for a few moments at least, disease was completely routed. If one had the wisdom to   
take root in such a moment, one would never again be ill or unhappy or even die. But to   
leap to this conclusion is to make a jump which would take one back farther than the old   
stone age. At that moment I wasn't even dreaming of taking root; 
 
I was experiencing for the first time in my life the meaning of the miraculous. I was so   
amazed when I heard my own cogs meshing that I was willing to die then and there for the   
privilege of the experience. 
 
What happened was this ... As I passed the doorman holding the torn stub in my hand the   
lights were dimmed and the curtains sent up. I stood a moment slightly dazed by the sudden   
darkness. As the curtain slowly rose I had the feeling that throughout the ages man had   
always been mysteriously stilled by this brief moment which preludes the sp ectacle. I could   
feel    the    curtain    rising    in man.    And immediately I also realized that this was a symbol   
which was being presented to him endlessly in his sleep and that if he had been awake the   
players    would    never    have    taken    the    stage    but    he,    M an,    would    have    mounted    the    boards.    I   
didn't think this thought - it was a realization, as I say, and so simple and   
overwhelmingly clear was it that the machine stopped dead instantly and I was standing in   
my own presence bathed in a luminous reality. I turned my eyes away from the stage and   
beheld the marble 
 
260 
 
staircase which I should take to go to my seat in the balcony. I saw a man slowly mounting   
the steps, his hand laid across the balustrade. The man could have been myself, the old   
self which had been sleepwalking ever since I was born. M y eye didn't take in the entire   
staircase, just the few steps which the man had climbed or was climbing in the moment that   
I took it all in. The man never reached the top of the stairs and his hand was never   
removed from the marble balustrade. I felt the curtain descend, and for another few moments   
I was behind the scenes moving amidst the sets, like the property man suddenly roused from   
his sleep and not sure whether he is still dreaming or looking at a dream which is being   
enacted on the stage. It was as fresh and green, as strangely new as the bread and cheese   
lands which the Biddenden maidens saw every day of their long life joined at the hips. I   
saw only that which was alive! the rest faded out in a penumbra. And it was in order to   
keep the world alive that I rushed home without waiting to see the performance and sat down   
to describe the little patch of staircase which is imperishable. 
 
It was just about this time that the Dadaists were in full swing, to be followed shortly by   
the Surrealists. I never heard of either group until some ten years later; I never read a   
French book and I never had a French idea. I was perhaps the unique Dadaist in America, and   
 
 
 176 
 216 
 
   
 
a thing, because the concept "thing" was missing. 
 
 
 
 
I didn't know it. I might just as well have been living in the jungles of the Amazon for   
all the contact I had with the outside world. Nobody understood what I was writing about or   
why I wrote that way. I was so lucid that they said I was daffy. I was describing the New   
World - unfortunately a little too soon because it had not yet been discovered and nobody   
could be persuaded that it existed. It was an ovarian world, still hidden away in the   
Fallopian tubes. Naturally nothing was dearly formulated: there was only the faint   
suggestion    of    a    backbone    visible,    and    certainly    no    arms    or    legs,    no    hair,    no    nails,    no   
teeth. Sex was the last thing to be dreamed of; it was the world of Chronos and his   
ovicular progeny. It was the world of the iota, each iota being indispensable,   
frighteningly logical, and absolutely unpredictable. 
 
261 
 
There was no such thing as 
 
I say it was a New World I was describing, but like the New World which Columbus discovered   
it turned out to be a far older world than any we have known. I saw beneath the superficial   
physiognomy of skin and bone the indestructible world which man has always carried within   
him; it was neither old nor new, really, but the eternally true world which changes from   
moment to moment. Everything I looked at was palimpsest and there was no layer of writing   
too strange for me to decipher. When my companions left me of an evening I would often sit   
down and write to my friends the Australian Bushmen or to the Mound Builders of the   
Mississippi Valley or to the Igorotes in the Philippines. I had to write English,   
naturally, because it was the only language I spoke, but between my language and the   
telegraphic code employed by my bosom friends there was a world of difference. Any   
primitive man would have understood me, any man of archaic epochs would have understood me:   
only those about me, that is to say, a continent of a hundred million people, failed to   
understand my language. To write intelligibly for them I would have been obliged first of   
all to kill something, secondly, to arrest time. I had just made the realization that life   
is indestructible and that there is no such thing as time, only the present. Did they   
expect me to deny a truth which it had taken me all my life to catch a glimpse of? They   
most certainly did. The one thing they did not want to hear about was that life is   
indestructible. Was not their precious new world reared on the destruction of the innocent,   
on rape and plunder and torture and devastation? Both continents had been violated; both   
continents had been stripped and plundered of all that was precious - in things. No greater   
humiliation, it seems to me, was meted out to any man than to Montezuma; no race was ever   
more ruthlessly wiped out than the American Indian; no land was ever raped in the foul and   
bloody way that California was raped by the gold-diggers. I blush to think of our origins -   
our hands are steeped in blood and crime. And there is no let-up to the slaughter and the   
pillage, as I discovered at first hand travelling throughout  
 
262 
 
the length and breadth of the land. Down to the closest friend every man is a potential   
 
 
 177 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
murderer. Often it wasn't necessary to bring out the gun or the lasso or the branding iron   
- they had found subtler and more devilish ways of torturing and killing their own. For me   
the most excruciating agony was to have the word annihilated before it had even left my   
mouth. I learned, by bitter experience, to hold my tongue; I learned to sit in silence, and   
even smile, when actually I was foaming at the mouth. I learned to shake hands and say how   
do you do to all these innocent-looking fiends who were only waiting for me to sit down in   
order to suck my blood. 
 
How was it possible, when I sat down in the parlour at my prehistoric desk, to use this   
code language of rape and murder? I was alone in this great hemisphere of violence, but I   
was not alone as far as the human race was concerned. I was lonely amidst a world of things   
lit up by phosphorescent flashes of cruelty. I was delirious with an energy which could not   
be unleashed except in the service of death and futility. I could not begin with a full   
statement - it would have meant the strait-jacket or the electric chair. I was like a man   
who had been too long incarcerated in a dungeon - I had to feel my way slowly, falteringly,   
lest I stumble and be run over. I had to accustom myself gradually to the penalties which   
freedom involves. I had to grow a new epidermis which would protect me from this burning   
light in the sky. 
 
The ovarian world is the product of a life rhythm. The moment a child is born it becomes   
part of a world in which there is not only the life rhythm but the death rhythm. The   
frantic desire to live, to live at any cost, is not a result of the life rhythm in us, but   
of the death rhythm. There is not only no need to keep alive at any price, but, if life is   
undesirable, it is absolutely wrong. This keeping oneself alive, out of a blind urge to   
defeat death, is in itself a means of sowing death. Every one who has not fully accepted   
life, who is not incrementing life, is helping to fill the world with death. To make the   
simplest gesture with the hand can convey the utmost sense of life; a word spoken with the   
whole being can give life. Activity in itself means nothing: it is often a sign of death.   
By 
 
263 
 
simple external pressure, by force of surroundings and example, by the very climate which   
activity engenders, one can become part of a monstrous death machine, such as America, for   
example. What does a dynamo know of life, of peace, of reality? What does any individual   
American dynamo know of the wisdom and energy, of the life abundant and eternal possessed   
by a ragged beggar sitting under a tree in the act of meditation? What is energy? What is   
life? One has only to read the stupid twaddle of the scientific and philosophic textbooks   
to realize how less than nothing is the wisdom of these energetic Americans. Listen, they   
had me on the run, these crazy horsepower fiends; in order to break their insane rhythm,   
their death rhythm, I had to resort to a wavelength which, until I found the proper   
sustenance in my own bowels, would at least nullify the rhythm they had set up. Certainly I   
did not need this grotesque, cumbersome, antediluvian desk which I had installed in the   
parlour; certainly I didn't need twelve empty chairs placed around in a semicircle; I   
 178 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needed only elbow room in which to write and a thirteenth chair which would take me out of   
the zodiac they were using and put me in a heaven beyond heaven. But when you drive a man   
almost crazy and when, to his own surprise perhaps, he finds that he still has some   
resistance, some powers of his own, then you are apt to find such a man acting very much   
like a primitive being. Such a man is apt not only to become stubborn and dogged, but   
superstitious, a believer in magic and a practiser of magic. Such a man is beyond religion   
- it is his religiousness he is suffering from. Such a man becomes a monomaniac, bent on   
doing one thing only and that is to break the evil spell which has been put upon him. Such   
a man is beyond throwing bombs, beyond revolt; he wants to stop reacting, whether inertly   
or ferociously. This man, of all men on earth, wants the act to be a manifestation of life.   
If, in the realization of his terrible need, he begins to act regressively, to become   
unsocial, to stammer and stutter, to prove so utterly unadapted as to be incapable of   
earning a living, know that this man has found his way back to the womb and source of life   
and that tomorrow, instead of the contemptible object of ridicule which you have 
 
264 
 
made of him, he will stand forth as a mm in his own right and all the powers of the world   
will be of no avail against him. 
 
Out of the crude cipher with which he communicates from his prehistoric desk with the   
archaic men of the world a new language builds up which cuts through the death language of   
the day like wireless through a storm. There is no magic in this wavelength any more than   
there is magic in the womb. Men are lonely and out of communication with one another   
because all their inventions speak only of death. Death is the automaton which rules the   
world of activity. Death is silent, because it has no mouth. Death has never    expressed   
anything.    Death    is    wonderful    too    -    after life.    Only one like myself who has opened his   
mouth and spoken, only one who has said Yes, Yes, Yes, and again Yes! can open wide his   
arms to death and know no fear. Death as a reward, yes! Death as a result of fulfillment,   
yes! Death as a crown and shield, yes! But not death from the roots, isolating men, making   
them bitter and fearful and lonely, giving them fruitless energy, filling them with a will   
which can only say No! The first word any man writes when he has found himself, his own   
rhythm, which is the life rhythm is Yes! Everything he writes thereafter is Yes, Yes, Yes -   
Yes in a thousand million ways. No dynamo, no matter how huge - not even a dynamo of a   
hundred million dead souls - can combat one man saying Yes! 
 
The war was on and men were being slaughtered, one million, two million, five million, ten   
million, twenty million, finally a hundred million, then a billion, everybody, man, woman   
and child, down to the last one. "No!" they were shouting, "No! they shall not pass!" And   
yet everybody passed; everybody got a free pass, whether he shouted Yes or No. In the midst   
of this triumphant demonstration of spiritually destructive osmosis I sat with my feet   
planted on the big desk trying to communicate with Zeus the Father of Atlantis and with his   
lost progeny, ignorant of the fact that Apollinaire was to die the day before the Armistice   
in a military hospital, ignorant of the fact that in his "new writing" he had penned these   
 179 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indelible lines, 
 
265 
 
"Be forbearing when you compare us 
With those who were the perfection of order. 
We who everywhere seek adventure, 
We are not your enemies. 
We would give you vast and strange domains 
Where flowering mystery waits for him would pluck it." 
Ignorant that in this same poem he had also written: 
"Have compassion on us who are always fighting on the frontiers Of the boundless future, 
 
Compassion for our errors, compassion for our sins." I was ignorant of the fact that there   
were men then living who went by the outlandish names of Blaise Cendrars, Jacques Vache,   
Louis Aragon, Tristan Tzara, Rene Crevel, Henri de Montherlant, Andre Breton, Max Ernst,   
George Grosz; ignorant of the fact that on July, 14,1916, at the Saal Waag, in Zurich, the   
first Dada Manifesto had been proclaimed -"manifesto by monsieur antipyrine" - that in this   
strange    document    it    was    stated    "Dada    is    life    without    slippers    or    parallel    .    .    .    severe   
necessity without discipline or morality and we spit on humanity." Ignorant of the fact   
that the Dada M anifesto of 1918 contained these lines. "I am writing a manifesto and I want   
nothing, yet I say certain things, and I am against manifestoes as a matter of principle,   
as I am also against principles ... I write this manifesto to show that one may perform   
opposed actions together, in a single fresh respiration, I am against action; for continual   
contradiction, for affirmation also, I am neither for nor against and I do not explain for   
I hate good sense .. . There is a literature which does not reach the voracious mass. The   
work of creators, sprung from a real necessity on the part of the author, and for himself.   
Consciousness of a supreme egotism where the stars waste away . . . Each page must explode,   
either with the profoundly serious and heavy, the whirlwind, dizziness, the new, the   
eternal, with the overwhelming hoax, with an enthusiasm for principles or with the mode of   
typography. On the one hand a staggering fleeing world, affianced to the jingle-bells of   
the infernal gamut, on the other hand: 
 
266 
 
Thirty-two years later and I am still saying Yes! Yes, M onsieur Antipyrine! Yes,Monsieur   
Tristan Bustanoby Tzara! Yes, Monsieur Max Ernst Geburt! Yes! Monsieur Rene Crevel, now   
that you are dead by suicide, yes, the world is crazy, you were right. Yes, Monsieur Blaise   
Cendrars, you were right to kill. Was it the day of the Armistice that you brought out your   
little book -J'ai tue? Yes, "keep on my lads, humanity..." Yes, Jacques Vache, quite right   
- "Art ought to be something funny and a trifle boring." Yes, my dear dead Vache, how right   
you were and how funny and how boring the touching and tender and true: "It is of the   
essence of symbols to be symbolic." Say it again, from the other world! Have you a   
megaphone up there? Have you found all the arms and legs that were blown off during the   
new beings..." 
 
 
 180 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
melee? Can you put them together again? Do you remember the meeting at Nantes in 1916 with   
Andre Breton? Did you celebrate the birth of hysteria together? Had he told you, Breton,   
that there was only the marvellous and nothing but the marvellous and that the marvellous   
is always marvellous - and isn't it marvellous to hear it again, even though your ears are   
stopped? I want to include here, before passing on, a little portrait of you by Emile   
Bouvier for the benefit of my Brooklyn friends who may not have recognized me then but who   
will now, I am sure... 
 
". . . he was not all crazy, and could explain his conduct when occasion required. His   
actions, none the less, were as disconcerting as Jarry's worst eccentricities. For example,   
he was barely out of hospital when he hired himself out as a stevedore, and he thereafter   
passed his afternoons in unloading coal on the quays along the Loire. In the evening, on   
the other hand he would make the rounds of the cafes and cinemas, dressed in the height of   
fashion and with many variations of costume. What was more, in time of war, he would strut   
forth sometimes in the uniform of a lieutenant of Hussars, sometimes in that of an English   
officer, of an aviator or of a surgeon. In civil life, he was quite as free and easy,   
thinking nothing of introducing Breton under the name of Andre Salmon, while he took unto   
himself, but quite without vanity, the most wonderful titles and adventures. He never said   
good morning 
 
267 
 
nor good evening nor good-bye, and never took any notice of letters, except those from his   
mother, when he had to ask for money. He did not recognize his best friends from one day to   
another..." 
 
Do you recognize me, lads? Just a Brooklyn boy communicating with the red-haired albinos of   
the Zuni region. Making ready, with feet on the desk, to write "strong works, works forever   
incomprehensible", as my dead comrades were promising. These "strong works" - would you   
recognize them if you saw them? Do you know that of the millions who were killed not one   
death    was    necessary    to    produce    "the    strong    work"?    New beings,    yes! We have need of new   
beings still. We can do without the telephone, without the automobile, without the high- 
class bombers - but we can't do without new beings. If Atlantis was submerged beneath the   
sea, if the Sphinx and the Pyramids remain an eternal riddle, it is because there were no   
more new beings being born. Stop the machine a moment! Plash back! Flash back to 1914, to   
the    Kaiser    sitting    on    his    horse.    Keep    him    sitting    there    a    moment    with    his    withered    arm   
clutching    the    bridle    rein.    Look    at    his    moustache!    Look    at    his    haughty    air    of    pride    and   
arrogance! Look at his cannon-fodder lined up in strictest discipline, all ready to obey   
the word, to get shot, to get disembowelled, to be burned in quicklime. Hold it a moment,   
now, and look at the other side: the defenders of our great and glorious civilization, the   
men who will war to end war. Change their clothes, change uniforms, change horses, change   
flags, change terrain. My, is that the Kaiser I see on a white horse? Are those the   
terrible Huns? And where is Big Bertha? Oh, I see -1 thought it was pointing towards Notre   
Dame? Humanity, me lads, humanity always marching in the van . . . And the strong works we   
 181 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were    speaking    of?    Where    are    the    strong    works?    Call    up    the    Western    Union    and    dispatch    a   
messenger fleet of foot - not a cripple or an octogenarian, but a young one! Ask him to   
find the great work and bring it back. We need it. We have a brand new museum ready waiting   
to house it - and cellophane and the Dewey Decimal system to file it. All we need is the   
name of the author. Even if he has no name, even if it is anonymous work, 
 
268 
 
we won't kick. Even if it has a little mustard gas in it we won't mind. Bring it back dead   
or alive - there's a $25,000 reward for the man who fetches it. 
 
And if they tell you that these things had to be, that things could not have happened   
otherwise, that France did her best and Germany her best and that little Liberia and little   
Ecuador and all the other allies also did their best, and that since the war everybody has   
been doing his best to patch things up or to forget, tell them that their best is not good   
enough, that we don't want to hear any more this logic of "doing the best one can", tell   
them we don't want the best of a bad bargain, we don't believe in bargains good or bad, nor   
in war memorials. We don't want to hear about the logic of events - or any kind of logic.   
"Je ne parle pas logique," said Montherlant, "je parle generosite." I don't think you heard   
it very well, since it was in French. I'll repeat it for you, in the Queen's own language;   
"I'm not talking logic, I'm talking generosity." That's bad English, as the Queen herself   
might speak it, but it's clear.    Generosity -    do you hear? You never practise it, any of   
you, either in peace or in war. You don't know the meaning of the word. You think to supply   
guns and ammunition to the winning side is generosity; you think sending Red Cross nurses   
to the front, or the Salvation Army, is generosity. You think a bonus twenty years too late   
is generosity; you think a little pension and a wheel chair is generosity; you think if you   
give a man his old job back it's generosity. You don't know what the fucking war means, you   
bastards! To be generous is to say Yes before the man even opens his mouth. To say Yes you   
have to first be a Surrealist or a Dadaist, because you have understood what it means to   
say No. You can even say Yes and No at the same time, provided you do more than is expected   
of you. Be a stevedore in the day time and a Beau Brummel in the night-time. Wear any   
uniform so long as it's not yours. When you write your mother ask her to cough up a little   
dough so that you may have a clean rag to wipe your ass with. Don't be disturbed if you see   
your neighbour going after his wife with a knife: he probably has good reason to go after   
her, and if he kills her you may be sure he has the satisfaction of knowing 
 
269 
 
why    he did it. If you're trying to improve your mind, stop it I There's no improving the   
mind. Look at your heart and gizzard - the brain is in the heart. 
 
Ah yes, if I had known then that these birds existed -Cendrars, Vache, Grosz, Ernst,   
Apollinaire - if I had known that then, if I had known that in their own way they were   
thinking exactly the same things as I was, I think I'd have blown up. Yes, I think I'd have   
 
 
 182 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
gone off like a bomb. But I was ignorant. Ignorant of the fact that almost fifty years   
previously a crazy Jew in South America had given birth to such startlingly marvellous   
phrases as "doubt's duck with the vermouth lips" or "I have seen a fig eat an onager" -   
that about the same time a Frenchman, who was only a boy, was saying: "Find flowers that   
are chairs" . . . "my hunger is the black air's bits" . . . "his heart, amber and spunk".   
Maybe    at    the    same    time,    or    thereabouts,    while    Jarry    was    saying    "in    eating    the    sound    of   
moths", and Apollinaire repeating after him "near a gentleman swallowing himself", and   
Breton murmuring softly "night's pedals move uninterruptedly", perhaps "in the air   
beautiful and black" which the lone Jew had found under the Southern Cross another man,   
also    lonely    and    exiled    and    of    Spanish    origin,    was    preparing    to    put    down    on    paper    these   
memorable words: "I seek, all in all, to console myself for my exile, for my exile from   
eternity, for that unearthing (destierro) which I am fond of referring to as my unheavening   
... At present, I think that the best way of writing this novel is to tell how it should be   
written. It is the novel of the novel, the creation of creation. Or God of God,    Deus de   
Deo."    Had I known he was going to add this, this which follows, I would surely have gone   
off like a bomb... "By being crazy is understood losing one's reason. Reason, but not the   
truth, for there are madmen who speak truths while others keep silent. . ." Speaking of   
these things, speaking of the war and the war dead, I cannot refrain from mentioning that   
some twenty years later I ran across this in French by a Frenchman. 0 miracles of miracles!   
"Il faut le dire, il y a des cadavres que je ne respecte qu'a moitie" Yes, yes, and again   
yes! O, let us do some rash things - for the sheer pleasure of it! Let us do something live   
 
270 
 
and magnificent, even if destructive! Said the mad cobbler: "All things are generated oat   
of the grand mystery, and proceed out of one degree into another. Whatever goes forward in   
its degree, the same receives no abominate."  
 
Everywhere in all times the same ovarian world announcing itself. Yet also, parallel with   
these announcements, these prophecies, the gynecological manifestoes, parallel and   
contemporaneous with them new totem poles, new taboos, new war dances. While into the air   
so    black    and    beautiful    the    brothers    of    man,    the    poets,    the    diggers    of    the    future,    were   
spitting their magic lines, in this same time, 0 profound and perplexing riddle, other men   
were saying: "Won't you please come and take a job in our ammunition factory. We promise   
you the highest wages, the most sanitary and hygienic conditions. The work is so easy that   
even a child could do it" And if you had a sister, a wife, a mother, an aunt, as long as   
she could manipulate her hands, as long as she could prove that she had no bad habits, you   
were invited to bring her or them along to the ammunition works. If you were shy of soiling   
your hands they would explain to you very gently and intelligently just how these delicate   
mechanisms operated, what they did when they exploded, and why you must not waste even your   
garbage because... et ipso facto e pluribus unum. The thing that impressed me, going the   
rounds in search of work, was not so much that they made me vomit every day (assuming I had   
been lucky enough to put something into my guts), but that they always demanded to know if   
you were of good habits, if you were steady, if you were sober, if you were industrious, if   
 183 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you had ever worked before and if not why not. Even the garbage, which I had gotten the job   
of collecting for the municipality, was precious to them, the killers. Standing knee-deep   
in the muck, the lowest of the low, a coolie, an outcast, still I was part of the death   
racket. I tried reading the    Inferno    at    night,    but    it    was    in    English    and    English    is    no   
language for a catholic work. "Whatever enters in itself into its selfhood, viz. into its   
own lubet.. ." Lubet! If I had had a word like that to conjure with then, how peacefully I   
might have gone about my garbage collecting! How sweet, in the 
 
271 
 
night, when Dante is out of reach and the hands smell of muck and slime, to take unto   
oneself    this    word    which    in    the    Dutch    means    "lust"    and    in    Latin    'lubitum"    or    the    divine   
beneplacitum.    Standing knee-deep in the garbage I said one day what Meister Eckhart is   
reported to have said long ago: "I truly have need of God, but God has need of me too."   
There was a job waiting for me in the slaughterhouse, a nice little job of sorting   
entrails, but I couldn't raise the fare to get to Chicago. I remained in Brooklyn, in my   
own palace of entrails, and turned round and round on the plinth of the labyrinth. I   
remained at home seeking the "germinal vesicle", "the dragon castle on the floor of the   
sea", "the Heavenly Harp", "the field of the square inch", "the house of the square foot",   
"the dark pass", "the space of former Heaven". I remained locked in, a prisoner of   
Forculus, god of the door, of Cardea, god of the hinge, and of Limentius, god of the   
threshold. I spoke only with their sisters, the three goddesses called Fear, Pallor and   
Fever. I saw no "Asian luxury", as had St. Augustine, or as he imagined he had. Nor did I   
see "the two twins born, so near together, that the second held the first by the heel". But   
I saw a street called Myrtle Avenue, which runs from Borough Hall to Fresh Pond Road, and   
down this street no saint ever walked (else it would have crumbled), down this street no   
miracle ever passed, nor any poet, nor any species of human genius, nor did any flower ever   
grow there, nor did the sun strike it squarely, nor did the rain ever wash it. For the   
genuine Inferno which I had to postpone for twenty years I give you Myrtle Avenue, one of   
the innumerable bridlepaths ridden by iron monsters which lead to the heart of America's   
emptiness. If you have only seen Essen or Manchester or Chicago or Levallois-Perret or   
Glasgow or Hoboken or Canarsie or Bayonne you have seen nothing of the magnificent   
emptiness of progress and enlightenment. Dear reader, you must see Myrtle Avenue before you   
die, if only to realize how far into the future Dante saw. You must believe me that on this   
street, neither in the houses which line it, nor the cobblestones which pave it, nor the   
elevated structure which cuts it atwain, neither in any creature that bears a name and   
lives thereon, neither in any animal, bird or insect  
 
272 
 
passing through it to slaughter or already slaughtered, is there hope of "lubet",   
"sublimate" or "abominate". It is a street not of sorrow, for sorrow would be human and   
recognizable, but of sheer emptiness: it is emptier than the most extinct volcano, emptier   
than a vacuum, emptier than the word God in the mouth of an unbeliever. 
 184 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I said I did not know a word of French then, and it is true, but I was just on the brink of   
making a great discovery, a discovery which would compensate for the emptiness of Myrtle   
Avenue and the whole American continent. I had almost reached the shore of that great   
French ocean which goes by the name of Elie Faure, an ocean which the French themselves had   
hardly navigated and which they had mistaken, it seems, for an inland sea. Reading him even   
in such    a    withered language as English has become, I could see that this man who had   
described the glory of the human race on his cuff was Father Zeus of Atlantis, whom I had   
been searching for. An ocean I called him, but he was also a world symphony. He was the   
first musician the French have produced; he was exalted and controlled, an anomaly, a   
Gallic Beethoven, a great physician of the soul, a giant lightning-rod. He was also a   
sunflower turning with the sun, always drinking in the light, always radiant and blazing   
with vitality. He was neither an optimist nor a pessimist, any more than one can say that   
the ocean is beneficient or malevolent. He was a believer in the human race. He added a   
cubit to the race, by giving it back its dignity, its strength, its need of creation. He   
saw everything as creation, as solar joy. He didn't record it in orderly fashion, he   
recorded it musically. He was indifferent to the fact that the French have a tin ear - he   
was orchestrating for the whole world simultaneously. What was my amazement then, when some   
years later I arrived in France, to find that there were no monuments erected to him, no   
streets named after him. Worse, during eight whole years I never once beard a Frenchman   
mention his name. He had to die in order to be put in the pantheon of French deities - and   
how sickly must they look, his deific contemporaries, in the presence of this radiant sun!   
If he had not been a physician, and thus permitted to earn a 
 
273 
 
livelihood, what might not have happened to him! Perhaps another able hand for the garbage   
trucks! The man who made the Egyptian frescoes come alive in all their flaming colours,   
this man could just as well have starved to death for all the public cared. But he was an   
ocean and the critics drowned in this ocean, and the editors and the publishers and the   
public too. It will take aeons for him to dry up, to evaporate. It will take about as long   
as for the French to acquire a musical ear. 
 
If there had been no music I would have gone to the madhouse like Nijinsky. (It was just   
about this time that they discovered that Nijinsky was mad.) He had been found giving his   
money away to the poor - always a bad sign! My mind was filled with wonderful treasures, my   
taste was sharp and exigent, my muscles were in excellent condition, my appetite was   
strong, my wind sound. I had nothing to do except to improve myself, and I was going crazy   
with the improvements I made every day. Even if there were a job for me to fill I couldn't   
accept it, because what I needed was not work but a life more abundant. I couldn't waste   
time being a teacher, a lawyer, a physician, a politician or anything else that society had   
to offer. It was easier to accept menial jobs because it left my mind free. After I was   
fired from the garbage trucks I remember taking up with an Evangelist who seemed to have   
great confidence in me. I was a sort of usher, collector and private secretary. He brought   
to my attention the whole world of Indian philosophy. Evenings when I was free I would meet   
 185 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with my friends at the home of Ed Bauries who lived in an aristocratic section of Brooklyn.   
Ed Bauries was an eccentric pianist who couldn't read a note. He had a bosom pal called   
George Neumiller with whom he often played duets. Of the dozen or so who congregated at Ed   
Bauries' home nearly every one of us could play the piano. We were all between twenty -one   
and twenty-five at the time; we never brought any women along and we hardly ever mentioned   
the subject of women during these sessions. We had plenty of beer to drink and a whole big   
house at our disposal, for it was in the Summer time, when his folks were away, that we   
held our gatherings. Though there were a dozen other homes like this which I could speak   
of, I mention Ed Bauries' place because it  
 
274 
 
was typical of something I have never encountered elsewhere in the world. Neither Ed   
Bauries himself nor any of his friends suspected the sort of books I was reading nor the   
things which were occupying my mind. When I blew in I was greeted enthusiastically - as a   
clown. It was expected, of me to start things going. There were about four pianos scattered   
throughout the big house to say nothing of the celesta, the organ, guitars, mandolins,   
fiddles and what not. Ed Bauries was a nut, a very affable, sympathetic and generous one   
too. The sandwiches were always of the best, the beer plentiful, and if you wanted to stay   
the    night he    could fix    you up    on a    divan just    as pretty    as you    liked. Coming    down the   
street - a big, wide street, somnolent, luxurious, a street altogether out of the world - I   
could hear the tinkle of the piano in the big parlour on the first floor. The windows were   
wide open and as I got into range I could see Al Burger or Connie Grimm sprawling in their   
big easy chairs, their feet on the window sill, and big beer mugs in their hands. Probably   
George Neumiller was at the piano, improvising, his shirt peeled off and a big cigar in his   
mouth. They were talking and laughing while George fooled around, searching for an opening.   
Soon as he hit a theme he would call for Ed and Ed would sit beside him, studying it out in   
his unprofessional way, then suddenly pouncing on the keys and giving tit for tat. Maybe   
when I'd walk in somebody would be trying to stand on his hands in the next room - there   
were three big rooms on the first floor which opened one on to the other and back of them   
was a garden, an enormous garden, with flowers, fruit trees, grape vines, statues,   
fountains an<f everything. Sometimes when it was too hot they brought the celesta or the   
little organ into the garden (and a keg of beer, naturally) and we'd sit around in the dark   
laughing and singing - until the neighbours forced us to stop. Sometimes the music was   
going on all through the house at once, on every floor. It was really crazy then,   
intoxicating, and if there had been women around it would have spoiled it. Sometimes it was   
like watching an endurance contest - Ed Bauries and George Neumiller at the grand piano,   
each trying to wear the other out, changing places without stopping, crossing hands,   
sometimes 
 
275 
 
felling away to plain chopsticks, sometimes going like a Wurlitzer. And always something to   
laugh about all the time. Nobody asked what you did, what you thought about, and so forth.   
 186 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When you arrived at Ed Bauries' place you checked your identification marks. Nobody gave a   
fuck what size hat you wore or how much you paid for it. It was entertainment from the word   
go - and the sandwiches and the drinks were on the house. And when things got going, three   
or four pianos at once, the celesta, the organ, the mandolins, the guitars, beer running   
through the halls, the mantelpieces full of sandwiches and cigars, a breeze coming through   
from the garden, George Neumiller stripped to the waist and modulating like a fiend, it was   
better than any show I've ever seen put on and it didn't cost a cent. In fact, with the   
dressing and undressing that went on, I always came away with a little extra change and a   
pocketful of good cigars. I never saw any of them between time - only Monday nights   
throughout the Summer, when Ed held open house. 
 
Standing in the garden listening to the din I could scarcely believe that it was the same   
city. And if I had ever opened my trap and exposed my guts it would have been all over. Not   
one of these bozos amounted to anything, as the world reckons. They were just good eggs,   
children, fellows who liked music and who liked a good time. They liked it so much that   
sometimes we had to call the ambulance. Like the night Al Burger twisted his knee while   
showing us one of his stunts. Everybody so happy, so full of music, so lit up, that it took   
him an hour to persuade us he was really hurt. We try to carry him to a hospital but it's   
too far away and besides, it's such a good joke, that we drop him now and then and that   
makes him yell like a maniac. So finally we telephone for help from a police box, and the   
ambulance comes and the patrol wagon too. They take Al to the hospital and the rest of us   
to the hoose-gow. And on the way we sing at the top of our lungs. And after we're bailed   
out we're still feeling good and the cops are feeling good too, and so we all adjourn to   
the basement where there's a cracked piano and we go on singing and playing. All this is   
like some period B.C. in history which ends not because there's a war but 
 
276 
 
because even a joint like Ed Bauries' is not immune to the poison seeping in from the   
periphery. Because every street is becoming Myrtle Avenue, because emptiness is filling the   
whole continent from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Because, after a certain time, you can't   
enter a single house throughout the length and breadth of the land and find a man standing   
on his hands singing. It just ain't done any more. And there ain't two pianos going at once   
anywhere, nor are there two men anywhere willing to play all night just for the fun of it.   
Two men who can play like Ed Bauries and George Neumiller are hired by the radio or the   
movies and only a thimbleful of their talent is used and the rest is thrown into the   
garbage can. Nobody knows, judging from public spectacles, what talent is disposable in the   
great American continent. Later on, and that's why I used to sit around on doorsteps in Tin   
Pan Alley, I would while away the afternoons listening to the professionals mugging it out.   
That was good too, but it was different. There was no fun in it, it was a perpetual   
rehearsal to bring in dollars and cents. Any man in America who had an ounce of humour in   
him was saving it up to put himself across. There were some wonderful nuts among them too,   
men I'll never forget, men who left no name behind them, and they were the best we   
produced. I remember an anonymous performer on the Keith circuit who was probably the   
 187 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
craziest man in America, and perhaps he got fifty dollars a week for it. Three times a day,   
every day in the week, he came out and held the audience spell-bound. He didn't have an act   
- he just improvised. He never repeated his jokes or his stunts. He gave himself   
prodigally, and I don't think he was a hot fiend either. He was one of those guys who are   
born in the corncrakes and the energy and the joy in him was so fierce that nothing could   
contain it. He could play any instrument and dance any step and he could invent a story on   
the spot and string it out till the bell rang. He was not only satisfied to do his own act   
but he would help the others out. He would stand in the wings and wait for the right moment   
to break into the other guy's act. He was the whole show and it was a show that contained   
more therapy than the whole arsenal of modem science. They ought to have paid 
 
277 
 
a man like this the wages which the President of the United States receives. They ought to   
sack the President of the United States and the whole Supreme Court and set up a man like   
this as ruler. This man could cure any disease on the calendar. He was the kind of guy,   
moreover, as would do it for nothing, if you asked him to. This is the type of man which   
empties the insane asylums. He doesn't propose a cure - he makes everybody crazy. Between   
this solution and a perpetual state of war, which is civilization, there is only one other   
way out - and that is the road we will all take eventually because everything else is   
doomed to failure. The type that represents this one and only way bears a head with six   
faces and eight eyes, the head is a revolving lighthouse, and instead of a triple crown at   
the top, as there might well be, there is a hole which ventilates what few brains there   
are. There is very little brain, as I say, because there is very little baggage to carry   
about, because living in full consciousness, the grey matter passes off into light. This is   
the only type of man one can place above the comedian; he neither laughs nor weeps, he is   
beyond suffering. We don't recognize him yet because he is too dose to us, right under the   
skin, as a matter of fact. When the comedian catches us in the guts this man, whose name   
might be God, I suppose, if he had to use a name, speaks up. When the whole human race is   
rocking with laughter, laughing so hard that it hurts, I mean, everybody then has his foot   
on the path. In that moment everybody can just as well be God as anything else. In that   
moment you have the annihilation of dual, triple, quadruple and multiple consciousness,   
which is what makes the grey matter coil up in dead folds at the top of the skull. At that   
moment you can really feel the hole in the top of the head; you know that you once had an   
eye there and that this eye was capable of taking in everything at once. The eye is gone   
now, but when you laugh until the tears flow and your belly aches, you are really opening   
the skylight andventilating the brains. Nobody can persuade you at that moment to take a   
gun and kill your enemy; neither can anybody persuade you to open a fat tome containing the   
metaphysical truths of the world and read it. If you know what freedom means, absolute 
 
278 
 
freedom and not a relative freedom, then you must recognize that this is the nearest to it   
you will ever get. If I am against the condition of the world it is not because I am a   
 188 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moralist - it is because I want to laugh more. I don't say that God is one grand laugh: I   
say that you've got to laugh hard before you can get anywhere near God. My whole aim in   
life is to get near to God, that is, to get nearer to myself. That's why it doesn't matter   
to me what road I take. But music is very important. Music is a tonic for the pineal gland.   
Music isn't Bach or Beethoven; music is the can-opener of the soul. It makes you terribly   
quiet inside, makes you aware that there's a roof to your being. 
 
The stabbing horror of life is not contained in calamities and disasters, because these   
things wake one up and one gets very familiar and intimate with them and finally they   
become tame again ... no, it is more like being in a hotel room in Hoboken let us say, and   
just enough money in one's pocket for another meal. You are in a city that you never expect   
to be in again and you have only to pass the night in your hotel room, but it takes all the   
courage and pluck you possess to stay in that room. There must be a good reason why certain   
cities, certain places, inspire such loathing and dread. There must be some kind of   
perpetual murder going on in these places. The people are of the same race as you, they go   
about their business as people do anywhere, they build the same sort of house, no better,   
no worse, they have the same system of education, the same currency, the same newspapers -   
and yet they are absolutely different from the other people you know, and the whole   
atmosphere is different, and the rhythm is different and the tension is different. It's   
almost like looking at yourself in another incarnation. You know, with a most disturbing   
certitude, that what governs life is not money, not politics, not religion, not training,   
not race, not language, not customs, but something else, something you're trying to throtde   
all the time and which is really throttling you, because otherwise you wouldn't be   
terrified all of a sudden and wonder how you were going to escape. Some cities you don't   
even have to pass a night in - just an hour or two is enough to unnerve you. I 
 
279 
 
think of Bayonne that way. I came on it in the night with a few addresses that had been   
given me. I had a briefcase under my arm with a prospectus of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.   
I was supposed to go under cover of dark and sell the bloody encyclopaedia to some poor   
devils who wanted to improve themselves. If I had been dropped off at Helsingfors I   
couldn't have felt more ill at ease than walking the streets of Bayonne. It wasn't an   
American city to me. It wasn't a city at all, but a huge octopus wriggling in the dark. The   
first door I came to looked so forbidding I didn't even bother to knock; I went like that   
to several addresses before I could summon the courage to knock. The first face I took a   
look at frightened the shit out of me. I don't mean timidity or embarrassment - I mean   
fear. It was the face of a hod-carrier, an ignorant mick who would as lief fell you with an   
axe as spit in your eye. I pretended I had the wrong name and hurried on to the next   
address. Each time the door opened I saw another monster. And then I came at last to a poor   
simp who really wanted to improve himself and that broke me down. I felt truly ashamed of   
myself, of my country, my race, my epoch. I had a devil of a time persuading him not to buy   
the damned encyclopaedia. He asked me innocently what then had brought me to his home - and   
without a minute's hesitation I told him an astounding lie, a lie which was later to prove   
 189 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a great truth. I told him I was only pretending to sell the encyclopaedia in order to meet   
people and write about them. That interested him enormously, even more than the   
encyclopaedia. He wanted to know what I would write about him, if I could say. It's taken   
me twenty years to answer that question, but here it is. If you would still like to know,   
John Doe of the City of Bayonne, this is it... I owe you a great deal because after that   
lie I told you I left your house and I tore up the prospectus furnished me by the   
Encyclopaedia Britannica and I threw it in the gutter. I said to myself I will never again   
go to people under false pretences even if it is to give them the Holy Bible. I will never   
again sell anything, even if I have to starve. I am going home now and I will sit down and   
really write about people. And if anybody knocks at my door to sell me something 
 
280 
 
I will invite him in and say "why are you doing this?" And if he says it is because he has   
to make a living I will oner him what money I have and beg him once again to think what he   
is doing. I want to prevent as many men as possible from pretending that they have to do   
this or that because they must earn a living. It is not true. One can starve to death - it   
is much better. Every man who voluntarily starves to death throws another cog into the   
automatic process. I would rather see a man take a gun and kill his neighbour, in order to   
get the food he needs, than keep up the automatic process by pretending that he has to cam   
a living. That's what I want to say, M r. John Doe. 
 
I pass on. Not the stabbing horror of disaster and calamity, I say, but the automatic   
throwback, the stark panorama of the soul's atavistic struggle. A bridge in North Carolina,   
near the Tennessee border. Coming out of lush tobacco fields, low cabins everywhere and the   
smell of fresh wood burning. The day passed in a thick lake of waving green. Hardly a soul   
in sight. Then suddenly a clearing and I'm over a big gulch spanned by a rickety wooden   
bridge. This is the end of the world! How in God's name I got here and why I'm here I don't   
know. How am I going to eat? And if I ate the biggest meal imaginable I would still be sad,   
frightfully sad. I don't know where to go from here. This bridge is the end, the end of me,   
the end of my known world. This bridge is insanity; there is no reason why it should stand   
there and no reason why people should cross it. I refuse to budge another step, I balk at   
crossing that crazy bridge. Nearby is a low wall which I lie against trying to think what   
to do and where to go. I realize quietly what a terribly civilized person I am - the need I   
have for people, conversation, books, theatre, music, cafes, drinks, and so forth. It's   
terrible to be civilized, because when you come to the end of the world you have nothing to   
support the terror of loneliness. To be civilized is to have complicated needs. And a man,   
when he is full blown, shouldn't need a thing. All day I had been moving through tobacco   
fields, and growing more and more uneasy. What have I to do with all this tobacco? What am   
I heading into? People everywhere are 
 
281 
 
producing crops and goods for other people - and I am like a ghost sliding between all this   
 190 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unintelligible activity. I want to find some kind of work, but I don't want to be a part of   
this thing, this infernal automatic process. I pass through a town and I look at the   
newspaper    telling    what    is    happening    in    that    town    and    its    environs.    It    seems    to    me    that   
nothing is happening, that the dock has stopped but that these poor devils are unaware of   
it. I have a strong intuition, moreover, that there is murder in the air. I can smell it. A   
few days back I passed the imaginary line which divides the North from the South. I wasn't   
aware of it until a darkie came along driving a team; when he gets alongside of me he   
stands up in his seat and doffs his hat most respectfully. He had snow-white hair and a   
face of great dignity. That made me feel horrible: it made me realize that there are still   
slaves.    This man    had to    tip his    hat to    me -because    I was    of the    white race.    Whereas I   
should have ripped my hat to him! I should have saluted him as a survivor of all the vile   
tortures the white men have inflicted on the black. I should have tipped my hat first, to   
let him know that I am not a part of this system, that I am begging forgiveness for all my   
white brethren who are too ignorant and cruel to make an honest overt gesture. To-day I   
feel their eyes on me all the time; they watch from behind doors, from behind trees. All   
very quiet, very peaceful, seemingly. Nigger never say nuthin'. Nigger he hum all time-   
White man think nigger learn his place. Nigger leam nuthin'. Nigger wait. Nigger watch   
everything white man do. Nigger no say nuthin', no sir, no siree. But JUST THE SAME THE   
nigger IS KILLING THE WHITE MAN OFF! 
 
Every time the nigger looks at a white man he's putting a dagger through him. It's not the   
heat, ifs not the hook worm, it's not the bad crops that's killing the South off - it's the   
nigger 1 The nigger is giving off a poison, whether he means to or not. The South is coked   
and doped with nigger poison. 
 
Pass on... Sitting outside a barber shop by the James River. I'll be here just ten minutes,   
while I take a load off my feet. There's a hotel and a few stores opposite me; it all tails   
off quickly, ends like it began - for no reason. From the bottom of my soul I pity the poor   
devils who are born and die here. There 
 
282 
 
is no earthly reason why this place should exist. There is no reason why anybody should   
cross the street and get himself a shave and haircut, or even a sirloin steak. Men, buy   
yourselves a gun and kill each other off! Wipe this street out of my mind for ever - it   
hasn't an ounce of meaning in it. 
 
The same day, after nightfall. Still plugging on, digging deeper and deeper into the South.   
I'm coming away from a little town by a short road leading to the highway. Suddenly I hear   
footsteps behind me and soon a young man passes me on the trot, breathing heavily and   
cursing with all his might. I stand there a moment, wondering what it's all about. I hear   
another man coming on the trot; he's an older man and he's carrying a gun. He breathes   
fairly    easy, and    not a    word out    of his    trap. Just    as he    comes in    view the    moon breaks   
through the clouds and I catch a good look at his face. He's a man hunter. I stand back as   
 
 
 191 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the others come up behind him. I'm trembling with fear. It's the sheriff, I hear a man say,   
and he's going to get him. Horrible. I move on towards the highway waiting to hear the shot   
that will end it all. I hear nothing - just this heavy breathing of the young man and the   
quick eager steps of the mob following behind the sheriff. Just as I get near the main road   
a man steps out of the darkness and comes over to me very quietly. "Where yer goin', son,"   
he says, quiet like and almost tenderly. I stammer out something about the next town.   
"Better stay right here, son," he says. I didn't say another word. I let him take me back   
into town and hand me over like a thief. I lay on the floor with about fifty other blokes.   
I had a marvellous sexual dream which ended with the guillotine. 
 
I plug on ... It's just as hard to go back as to go forward. I don't have the feeling of   
being an American citizen any more. The part of America I came from,    where    I    had    some   
rights, where I felt free,    is    so far behind me that it's beginning to get fuzzy in my   
memory. I feel as though some one's got a gun against my back all the time. Keep moving, is   
all I    seem to    hear. If    a man    talks to    me I    try not    to seem    too intelligent.    I try    to   
pretend that I am vitally interested in the crops, in the weather, in the elections. If I   
stand and stop they look at me, whites and blacks - they look me through and through as   
though I were 
 
283 
 
juicy and edible. I've got to walk another thousand miles or so as though I had a deep   
purpose, as though I were really going somewhere. I've got to look sort of grateful, too,   
that nobody has yet taken a fancy to plug me. It's depressing and exhilarating at the same   
time.    You're    a    marked    man    -    and    nobody    pulls    the    trigger.    They    let    you    walk    unmolested   
right into the Gulf of M exico where you can drown yourself. 
 
Yes sir, I reached the Gulf of M exico and I walked right into it and drowned myself. I did   
it gratis. When they fished the corpse out they found it was marked F.O.B. Myrtle Avenue,   
Brooklyn; it was returned C.O.D. When I was asked later why I had killed myself I could   
only think to say - because I wanted to electrify the cosmos! I meant by that a very simple   
thing -The Delaware, Lackawanna and Western had been electrified, the Seaboard Air Line had   
been electrified, but the soul of man was still in the covered wagon stage. I was born in   
the midst of civilization and I accepted it very naturally - what else was there to do? But   
the joke was that nobody else was taking it seriously. I was the only man in the community   
who was truly civilized. There was no place for me - as yet. And yet the books I read, the   
music I heard assured me, that there were other men in the world like myself. I had to go   
and drown myself in the Gulf of Mexico in order to have an excuse for continuing this   
pseudo-civilized existence. I had to delouse myself of my spiritual body, as it were. 
 
When I woke up to the fact that as far as the scheme of things goes I was less than dirt I   
really became quite happy. I quickly lost all sense of responsibility. And if it weren't   
for the fact that my friends got tired of lending me money I might have gone on   
indefinitely pissing the time away. The world was like a museum to me: I saw nothing to do   
 
 
 192 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
but eat into this marvellous chocolate layer cake which the men of the past had dumped on   
our hands. It annoyed everybody to see the way I enjoyed myself. Their logic was that art   
was very beautiful, oh yes, indeed, but you must work for a living and then you will find   
that you are too tired to think about art. But it was when I threatened to add a layer or   
two on my own account to this marvellous chocolate layer cake that they blew up on me. That   
 
284 
 
was the finishing touch. That meant I was definitely crazy. First I was considered to be a   
useless member of society; then for a time I was found to be a reckless, happy-go-lucky   
corpse with a tremendous appetite; now I had become crazy. (Listen, you bastard, you find     
yourself a job... we're through with you!) In a way it was refreshing this change of front.   
I could feel the wind blowing through the corridors. At least "we" were no longer becalmed.   
It was war, and as a corpse I was just fresh enough to have a little fight left in me. War   
is revivifying. War stirs the blood. It was in the midst of the world war, which I had   
forgotten about, that this change of heart took place. I got myself married overnight, to   
demonstrate to all and sundry that I didn't give a fuck one way or the other. Getting   
married was O.K. in their minds. I remember that, on the strength of the announcement, I   
raised five bucks immediately. My friend M acGregor paid for the licence and even paid for   
the shave and haircut which he insisted I go through with in order to get married. They   
said you couldn't go without being shaved; I didn't see any reason why you couldn't get   
hitched up without a shave and haircut, but since it didn't cost me anything I submitted to   
it. It was interesting to see how everybody was eager to contribute something to our   
maintenance. All of a sudden, just because I had shown a bit of sense, they came flocking   
around us - and couldn't they do this and couldn't they do that for us? Of course the   
assumption was that now I would surely be going to work, now I would see that life is   
serious business. It never occurred to them that I might let my wife work for me. I was   
really very decent to her in the beginning. I wasn't a slave driver. All I asked for was   
carfare -to hunt for the mythical job - and a little pin money for cigarettes, movies, et   
cetera. The important things, such as books, music albums, gramophones, porterhouse steaks   
and such like I found we could get on credit, now that we were married. The instalment plan   
had been invented expressly for guys like me. The down payment was easy - the rest I left   
to Providence. One has to live, they were always saying. Now, by God, that's what I said to   
myself -    One has to live I Live first andpay afterwards.    If    I    saw an overcoat I liked I   
went in and 
 
285 
 
bought it. I would buy it a little in advance of the season too, to show that I was a   
serious-minded chap. Shit, I was a married man and soon I would probably be a father - I   
was entitled to a winter overcoat at least, no? And when I had the overcoat I thought of   
stout shoes to go with it - a pair of thick cordevans such as I had wanted all my life but   
never could afford. And when it grew bitter cold and I was out looking for the job I used   
to get terribly hungry sometimes - it's really healthy going out like that day after day   
 193 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prowling about the city in rain and snow and wind and hail - and so now and then I'd drop   
in to a cosy tavern and order myself a juicy porterhouse steak with onions and French fried   
potatoes. I took out life insurance and accident insurance too - it's important, when   
you're married, to do things like that, so they told me. Supposing I should drop dead one   
day - what then? I remember the guy telling me that, in order to clinch his argument. I had   
already told him I would sign up, but he must have forgotten it. I had said, yes,   
immediately, out of force of habit, but as I say, he had evidently overlooked it - or else   
it was against the code to sign a man up until you had delivered the full sales talk.   
Anyway, I was just getting ready to ask him how long it would take before you could make a   
loan on the policy when he popped the hypothetical question: Supposing you should drop dead   
one day - what then?    I guess he thought I was a little off my nut the way I laughed at   
that. I laughed until the tears rolled down my face. Finally he said - "I don't see that I   
said anything so funny." "Well," I said, getting serious for a moment, "take a good look at   
me. Now tell me, do you think I'm the sort of fellow who gives a fuck what happens once   
he's dead?" He was quite taken aback by this, apparently, because the next thing he said   
was: "I don't think that's a very ethical attitude. M r. Miller. I'm sure you wouldn't want   
your wife to ..." "Listen," I said, "supposing I told you I don't give a fuck what happens   
to my wife when I die - what then?" And since this seemed to injure his ethical   
susceptibilities still more I added for good measure - "As far as I'm concerned you don't   
have to pay the insurance when I croak - I'm only doing this to make you feel good. I'm   
trying to help the world along, 
 
286 
 
don't you see? You've got to live, haven't you? Well, I'm just putting a little food in   
your mouth, that's all. If you have anything else to sell, trot it out. I buy anything that   
sounds good. I'm a buyer not a seller. I like to see people looking happy - that's why I   
buy things. Now listen, how much did you say that would come to per week? Fifty-seven   
cents? Fine. What's fifty-seven cents? You see that piano - that comes to about 39 cents a   
week, I think. Look around you ... everything you see costs so much a week. You say, if I   
should die, what then ? Do you suppose I'm going to die on all these people? That would be   
a hell of a joke. No, I'd rather have them come and take the things away - if I can't pay   
for them, I mean..." He was fidgeting about and there was a rather glassy stare in his eye,   
I thought. "Excuse me," I said, interrupting myself, "but wouldn't you like to have a   
little drink - to wet the policy?" He said he thought not, but I insisted, and besides, I   
hadn't signed the papers yet and my urine would have to be examined and approved of and all   
sorts of stamps and seals would have to be affixed -1 knew all that crap by heart - so I   
thought we might have a little snifter first and in that way protract the serious business,   
because honestly, buying insurance or buying anything was a real pleasure to me and gave me   
the feeling that I was just like every other citizen, a man, what! and not a monkey. So I   
got out a bottle of sherry (which is all that was allowed me), and I poured out a generous   
glassful for him, thinking to myself that it was fine to see the sherry going because maybe   
the next time they'd buy something better for me. "I used to sell insurance too once upon a   
time," I said, raising the glass to my lips. "Sure, I can sell anything. The only thing is   
 194 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- I'm lazy. Take a day like to-day - isn't it nicer to be indoors, reading a book or   
listening to the phonograph? Why should I go out and hustle for an insurance company? If I   
had been working to-day you wouldn't have caught me in -isn't that so? No, I think it's   
better to take it easy and help people out when they come along... like with you, for   
instance. It's much nicer to buy things than to sell them, don't you think? If you have the   
money, of course! In this house we don't need much money. As I was saying, the piano comes   
to about 
 
287 
 
39 cents a week, or forty-two maybe, and the ..." 
 
"Excuse me, Mr Miller," he interrupted, "but don't you think we ought to get down to   
signing these papers?" 
 
"Why, of course," I said cheerfully. "Did you bring them all with you? Which one do you   
think we ought to sign first? By the way, you haven't got a fountain pen you'd like to sell   
me, have you?" 
 
"Just sign right here," he said, pretending to ignore my remarks. "And here, that's it. Now   
then, M r. Miller, I think I'll say good day - and you'll be hearing from the company in a   
few days." 
 
"Better make it sooner," I remarked, leading him to the door, "because I might change my   
mind and commit suicide."  
 
"Why, of course, why yes, Mr. M iller, certainly we will. Good day now, good day!" 
 
Of course the instalment plan breaks down eventually, even if you're an assiduous buyer   
such as I was. I certainly did my best to keep the manufacturers and the advertising men of   
America busy, but they were disappointed in me it seems. Everybody was disappointed in   
me. .But there was one man in particular who was more disappointed in me than any one and   
that was a man who had really made an effort to befriend me and whom I had let down. I   
think    of him    and the    way he    took me    on as    his assistant    - so    readily and    graciously -   
because later, when I was hiring and firing like a 42 horse calibre revolver, I was   
betrayed right and left myself, but by that time I had become so inoculated that it didn't   
matter a damn. But this man had gone out of his way to show me that he believed in me. He   
was the editor of a catalogue for a great mail order house. It was an enormous compendium   
of horse-shit which was put out once a year and which took the whole year to make ready. I   
hadn't the slightest idea what it was all about and why I dropped into his office that day   
I don't know, unless it was because I wanted to get warm, as I had been knocking about the   
docks all day trying to get a job as a checker or some damned thing. It was cosy in his   
office and I made him a long speech so as to get thawed out. I didn't know what job to ask   
for - just a job, I said. He was a sensitive man and very kind- 
 
 
 
 195 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
288 
 
hearted. He seemed to guess that I was a writer, or wanted to be a writer, because soon he   
was asking me what I liked to read and what was my opinion of this writer and that writer.   
It just happened that I had a list of books in my pocket - books I was searching for at the   
public library - and so I brought it out and showed it to him. "Great Scott!" he exclaimed,   
"do you really read these books?" I modestly shook my head in the affirmative, and then as   
often happened to me when I was touched off by some silly remark like that, I began to talk   
about Hamsun's Mysteries which I had just been reading. From then on the man was like putty   
in my hands. When he asked me if I would like to be his assistant he apologized for   
offering me such a lowly position; he said I could take my time learning the ins-and-outs   
of the job, he was sure it would be a cach(?) for me. And then he asked me if he couldn't   
lend me some money, out of his own pocket until I got paid. Before I could say yes or no he   
had fished out a twenty dollar bill and thrust it in my hand. Naturally I was touched. I   
was ready to work like a son of a bitch for him. Assistant editor - it sounded quite good,   
especially to the creditors in the neighbourhood. And for a while I was so happy to be   
eating roast beef and chicken and tenderloins of pork that I pretended I liked the job.   
Actually it was difficult for me to keep awake. What I had to learn I had learned in a   
week's time. And after that? After that I saw myself doing penal servitude for life. In   
order to make the best of it I whiled away the time writing stories and essays and long   
letters to my friends. Perhaps they thought I was writing up new ideas for the company,   
because for quite a while nobody paid any attention to me. I thought it was a wonderful   
job. I had almost the whole day to myself, for my writing, having learned to dispose of the   
company's work in about an hour's time. I was so enthusiastic about my own private work   
that I gave orders to my underlings not to disturb me except at stipulated moments. I was   
sailing along like a breeze, the company paying me regularly and the slave-drivers doing   
the work I had mapped out for them, when one day, just when I am in the midst of an   
important essay on 
 
289 
 
bends over my shoulder, and in a sarcastic tone of voice begins to read aloud what I had   
just written. I didn't need to inquire who he was or what he was up to - the only thought   
in my head was, and that I repeated to myself frantically -    Will I get an extra week's   
pay ? When it came time to bid good-bye to my benefactor I felt a little ashamed of myself,   
particularly when he said, right off the bat like - "I tried to get you an extra week's pay   
but they wouldn't hear of it. I wish there was something I could do for you - you're only   
standing in your own way, you know. To tell the truth, I still have the greatest faith in   
you - but I'm afraid you're going to have a hard time of it, for a while. You don't fit in   
anywhere. Some day you'll make a great writer, I feel sure of it. Well, excuse me," he   
added, shaking hands with me warmly, "I've got to see the boss. Good luck to you!" 
 
I felt a bit cut up about the incident. I.wished it had been possible to prove to him then   
and there that his faith was justified. I wished I could have justified myself before the   
 196 
 216 
 
   
The Anti-Christ, a man whom I had never seen before walks up to my desk,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whole world at that moment: I would have jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge if it would have   
convinced people that I wasn't a heartless son of a bitch. I had a heart as big as a whale,   
as I was soon to prove, but nobody was examining into my heart. Everybody  was being let   
down hard - not only the instalment companies, but the landlord, the butcher, the baker,   
the gas, water and electricity devils,    everybody.    If only I could get to believe in this   
business of work! To save my life I couldn't see it. I could only see that people were   
working their balls off because they didn't know any better. I thought of the speech I had   
made which won me the job. In some ways I was very much like Herr Nagel myself. No telling   
from minute to minute what I would do. No knowing whether I was a monster or a saint Like   
so many wonderful men of our time. Herr Nagel was a desperate man - and it was this very   
desperation which made him such a likeable chap. Hamsun didn't know what to make of this   
character himself: he knew he existed, and he knew that there was something more to him   
than a mere buffoon and a mysrifier. I think he loved Herr Nagel more than any other   
character he created. And why? 
 
290 
 
Because    Herr    Nagel    was    the    unacknowledged    saint    which    every    artist    is    -    the    man    who    is   
ridiculed because his solutions, which are truly profound, seem too simple for the world.   
No man    wants    to be an artist - he is driven to it because the world refuses to recognize   
his proper leadership. Work meant nothing to me, because the real work to be done was being   
evaded. People regarded me as lazy and shiftless, but on the contrary I was an exceedingly   
active individual. Even if it was just hunting for a piece of tail, that was something, and   
well worth while, especially if compared to other forms of activity -such as making buttons   
or turning screws, or even removing appendixes. And why did people listen to me so readily   
when I applied for a job? Why did they find me entertaining? For the reason, no doubt, that   
I had always spent my time profitably. I brought them gifts - from my hours at the public   
library, from my idle ramblings through the streets, from my intimate experiences with   
women, from my afternoons at the burlesque, from my visits to the museum and the art   
galleries. Had I been a dud, just a poor honest bugger who wanted to work his balls off for   
so much a week, they wouldn't have offered me the jobs they did, nor would they have handed   
me cigars or taken me to lunch or loaned me money as they frequently did. I must have had   
something to offer which perhaps unknowingly they prized beyond horsepower or technical   
ability. I didn't know myself what it was, because I had neither pride, nor vanity, nor   
envy. About the big issues I was dear, but confronted by the petty details of life I was   
bewildered. I had to witness this same bewilderment on a colossal scale before I could   
grasp what it was all about Ordinary men are often quicker in sizing up the practical   
situation: their ego is commensurate with the demands made upon it: the world is not very   
different from what they imagine it to be. But a man who is completely out of step with the   
rest of the world is either suffering from a colossal inflation of his ego or else the ego   
is so submerged as to be practically non-existent. Herr Nagel had to dive off the deep end   
in search of his true ego; his existence was a mystery, to himself and to every one else. I   
couldn't afford to leave things hanging in suspense that way - 
 
 
 
 197 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
291 
 
the mystery was too intriguing. Even if I had to rub myself like a cat against every human   
being I encountered, I was going to get to the bottom of it. Rub long enough and hard   
enough and the spark will come! 
 
The hibernation of animals, the suspension of life practised by certain low forms of life,   
the marvellous vitality of the bedbug which lies in wait endlessly behind the wallpaper,   
the trance of the Yogi, the catalepsy of the pathologic individual, the mystic's union with   
the cosmos, the immortality of cellular life, all these things the artist learns in order   
to awaken the world at the propitious moment. The artist belongs to the X root race of man;   
he is the spiritual microbe, as it were, which carries over fro m one root race to another.   
He is not crushed by misfortune, because he is not a part of the physical, racial scheme of   
things. His appearance is always synchronous with catastrophe and dissolution; he is the   
cyclical being which lives in the epicycle. The experience which he acquires is never used   
for personal ends; it serves the larger purpose to which he is geared. Nothing is lost on   
him, however trifling. If he is interrupted for twenty-five years in the reading of a book   
he can go on from the page where he left off as though nothing had happened in between.   
Everything that happens in between, which is "life" to most people, is merely an   
interruption in his forward round. The eternality of his work, when he expresses himself,   
is merely the reflection of the automatism of life in which he is obliged to lie dormant, a   
sleeper    on    the    back    of    sleep,    waiting    for    the    signal    which    will    announce    the    moment    of   
birth. This is the big issue, and this was always dear to me, even when I denied it. The   
dissatisfaction which drives one on from one word to another, one creation to another, is   
simply a protest against the futility of postponement. The more awake one becomes, an   
artistic microbe, the less desire one has to do anything. Fully awake, everything is just   
and there is no need to come out of the trance. Action, as expressed in creating a work of   
art, is a concession to the automatic principle of death. Drowning myself in the Gulf of   
Mexico I was able to partake of an active life which would permit the real self to   
hibernate a until I was ripe to be born. I understood it perfectly, though I 
 
292 
 
acted blindly and confusedly. I swam back to the stream of human activity until I got to   
the source of all action and there muscled in, calling myself personnel director of a   
telegraph company, and allowed the tide of humanity to wash over me like great white-capped   
breakers. All this active life, preceding the final act of desperation, led me from doubt   
to doubt, blinding me more and more to the real self which, like a continent choked with   
the evidences of a great and thriving civilization, had already sunk beneath the surface of   
the sea. The colossal ego was submerged, and what people observed moving frantically above   
the surface was the periscope of the soul searching for its target. Everything that came   
within range had to be destroyed, if I were ever to rise again and ride the waves. This   
monster which rose now and then to fix its target with deadly aim, which dove again and   
roved and plundered ceaselessly would, when the time came, rise for the last time to reveal   
 198 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
itself as an ark, would gather unto itself a pair of each kind and at last, when the floods   
abated, would settle down on the summit of a lofty mountain peak thence to open wide its   
doors and return to the world what had been preserved from the catastrophe. 
 
If I shudder now and then, when I think of my active life, if I have nightmares, possibly    
it is because I think of all the men I robbed and murdered in my day sleep. I did   
everything which my nature bade me to do. Nature is eternally whispering in one's ear - "if   
you would survive you must kill!" Being human, you kill not like the animal but   
automatically, and the killing is disguised and its ramifications are endless, so that you   
kill without even thinking about it, you kill without need. The men who are the most   
honoured are the greatest killers. They believe that they are serving their fellowmen, and   
they are sincere in believing so, but they are heartless murderers and at moments, when   
they come awake, they realize their crimes and perform frantic, quixotic acts of goodness   
in order to expiate their guilt. The goodness of man stinks more than the evil which is in   
him, for the goodness is not yet acknowledged, not an affirmation of the conscious self.   
Being pushed over the precipice, it is easy at the last moment to surrender all one's  
 
293 
 
possessions, to turn and extend a last embrace to all who are left behind. How are we to   
stop the blind rush? How are we to stop the automatic process, each one pushing the other   
over the precipice? 
 
As I sat at my desk, over which I had put up a sign reading "Do not abandon all hope ye who   
enter here!" - as I sat there saying Yes, No, Yes, No, I realized, with a despair that was   
turning to white frenzy, that I was a puppet in whose hands society had placed a gatling   
gun. If I performed a good deed it was no different, ultimately, than if I had performed a   
bad deed. I was like an equals sign through which the algebraic swarm of humanity was   
passing. I was a rather important, active equals sign, like a general in time of war, but   
no matter how competent I were to become I could never change into a plus or a minus sign.   
Nor could any one else, as far as I could determine. Our whole life was built up on this   
principle of equation. The integers had become symbols which were shuffled about in the   
interests of death. Pity, despair, passion, hope, courage - these were the temporal   
refractions caused by looking at equations from varying angles. To stop the endless   
juggling by turning one's back on it, or by facing it squarely and writing about it, would   
be no help either. In a hall of mirrors there is no way to turn your back on yourself.    I   
will not do this... I will do some other thing I Very good. But can you do nothing at all?   
Can you stop thinking about not doing anything? Can you stop dead, and without thinking,   
radiate the truth which you know? That was the idea which lodged in the back of my head and   
which burned and burned, and perhaps when I was most expansive most radiant with energy,   
most sympathetic, most willing, helpful, sincere, good, it was this fixed idea which was   
shining through, and automatically I was saying - "why, don't mention it ... nothing at   
all, I assure you ... no, please don't thank me. it's nothing," etc. etc. From firing the   
gun so many hundreds of times a day perhaps I didn't even notice the detonations any more;   
 199 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perhaps I thought I was opening pigeon traps and filling the sky with milky white fowl. Did   
you ever see a synthetic monster on the screen, a Frankenstein realized in  
 
294 
 
flesh and blood? Can you imagine how he might be trained to pull a trigger and see pigeons   
flying at the same time? Frankenstein is not a myth: Frankenstein is a very real creation   
born of the personal experience of a sensitive human being. The monster is always more real   
when it does not assume the proportions of flesh and blood. The monster of the screen is   
nothing compared to the monster of the imagination; even the existent pathologic monsters   
who find their way into the police station are but feeble demonstrations of the monstrous   
reality which the pathologist lives with. But to be the monster and the pathologist at the   
same    time    -    that    is    reserved    for    certain    species    of    men    who,    disguised    as    artists,    are   
supremely aware that sleep is an even greater danger than insomnia. In order not to fall   
asleep, in order not to become victims of that insomnia which is called "living", they   
resort to the drug of putting words together endlessly. This is    not an automatic process,   
they say, because there is always present the illusion that they can stop it at will. But   
they cannot stop; they have only succeeded in creating an illusion, which is perhaps a   
feeble something, but it is far from being wide awake and neither active nor inactive.    I   
wanted to be wide awake without talking or writing about it, in order to accept life     
absolutely. I mentioned the archaic men in the remote places of the world with who, I was   
communicating frequently. Why did I think these "savages" more capable of understanding me   
than the men and women who surrounded me? Was I crazy to believe such a thing? I don't   
think so in the least. These "savages" are the degenerate remnants of earlier races of man   
who, I believe, must have had a greater hold on reality. The immortality of the race is   
constantly before oar eyes in these specimens of the past who linger on in withered   
splendour. Whether the human race is immortal or not is not my concern, but the vitality of   
the race does mean something to me, and that it should be active or dormant means even   
more. As the vitality of the new race banks down the vitality of the old races manifests   
itself to the waking mind with greater and greater significance. The vitality of the old   
races lingers on even in death, but the vitality of the new race which is about to die   
seems already non- 
 
295 
 
existent. If a man were taking a swarming hive of bees to the river to drown them... That   
was the image I carried about in me. If only I were the man, and not the bee! In some   
vague, inexplicable way I knew that I was the man, that I would not be drowned in the hive,   
like the others. Always, when we came forwards in a group I was signalled to stand apart;   
from birth I was favoured that way, and, no matter what tribulations I went through, I knew   
they were not fatal or lasting. Also, another strange thing took place in me whenever I was   
called to stand forth. I knew that I was superior to the man who was summoning me! The   
tremendous humility which I practised was not hypocritical but a condition provoked by the   
realization of the fateful character of the situation. The intelligence which I possessed,   
 200 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
even as a stripling, frightened me; it was the intelligence of a "savage", which is always   
superior to that of civilized men in that it is more adequate to the exigencies of   
circumstance. It is a    life intelligence, even though life has seemingly passed them by. I   
felt almost as if I had been shot forward into a round of existence which for the rest of   
mankind had not yet attained its full rhythm. I was obliged to mark time if I were to   
remain with them and not be shunted off to another sphere of existence. On the other hand,   
I was in many ways lower than the human beings about me. It was as though I had come out of   
the fires of hell not entirely purged. I had still a tail and a pair of horns, and when my   
passions were aroused I breathed a sulphurous poison which was annihilating. I was always   
called a "lucky devil". The good that happened to me was called "luck", and the evil was   
always regarded as a result of my shortcomings. Rather, as the fruit of my blindness.   
Rarely did any one ever spot the evil in me! I was as adroit, in this respect, as the devil   
himself. But that I was frequently blind, everybody could see that. And at such times I was   
left alone, shunned, like the devil himself. Then I left the world, returned to the fires   
of hell - voluntarily. These comings and goings are as real to me, more real, in fact, than   
anything that happened in between. The friends who think they know me know nothing about me   
for the reason that the real me changed hands countless times. Neither the men who thanked 
 
296 
 
me, nor the men who cursed me, knew with whom they were dealing. Nobody ever got on to a   
solid footing with me, because I was constantly liquidating my personality. I was keeping   
what is called the "personality" in abeyance for the moment when, leaving it to coagulate,   
it would adopt a proper human rhythm. I was hiding my face until the moment when I would   
find myself in step with the world. All this was, of course, a mistake. Even the role of   
artist is worth adopting, while marking time. Action is important, even if it entails   
futile activity. One should not say Yes, No, Yes, No, even seated in the highest place. One   
should not be drowned in the human tidal wave, even for the sake of becoming a Master. One   
must beat with his own rhythm - at any price. I accumulated thousands of years of   
experience in a few short years, but the experience was wasted because I had no need of it.   
I had already been crucified and marked by the cross; I had been born free of the need to   
suffer - and yet I knew no other way to struggle forward than to repeat the drama. All my   
intelligence was against it. Suffering is futile, my intelligence told me over and over,   
but I went on suffering voluntarily. Suffering has never taught me a thing; for others it   
may still be necessary, but for me it is nothing more than an algebraic demonstration of   
spiritual inadaptability. The whole drama which the man of today is acting out through   
suffering does not exist for me: it never did, actually. All my Calvaries were rosy   
crucifixions, pseudo-tragedies to keep the fires of hell burning brightly for the real   
sinners who are in danger of being forgotten. 
 
Another thing ... the mystery which enveloped my behaviour grew deeper the nearer I came to   
the circle of uterine relatives. The mother from whose loins I sprang was a complete   
stranger to me. To begin with, after giving birth to me she gave birth to my sister, whom I   
usually refer to as my brother. My sister was a sort of harmless monster, an angel who had   
 201 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been given the body of an idiot. It gave me a strange feeling, as a boy, to be growing up   
and developing side by side with this being who was doomed to remain all her life a mental   
dwarf. It was impossible to be a brother to her because it was impossible to regard this   
atavistic hulk of a body as a "sister". 
 
297 
 
She would have functioned perfectly, I imagine, among the Australian primitives. She might   
even have been raised to power and eminence among them, for, as I said, she was the essence   
of goodness, she knew no evil. But so far as living the civilized life goes she was   
helpless; she not only had no desire to kill but she had no desire to thrive at the expense   
of others. She was incapacitated for work, because even if they had been able to train her   
to make caps for high explosives, for example, she might absent-mindedly throw her wages in   
the river on the way home or she might give them to a beggar in the street. Often in my   
presence she was whipped like a dog for having performed some beautiful act of grace in her   
absent-mindedness, as they called it. Nothing was worse, I learned as a child, than to do a   
good deed without reason. I had received the same punishment as my sister, in the   
beginning, because I too had a habit of giving things away, especially new things which had   
just been given me. I had even received a bearing once, at the age of five, for having   
advised my mother to cut a wart off her finger. She had asked me what to do about it one   
day and, with my limited knowledge of medicine, I told her to cut it off with scissors,   
which she did, like an idiot. A few days later she got blood poisoning and then she got   
hold of me and she said - "you told me to cut it off, didn't you?" and she gave me a sound   
thrashing. From that day on I knew that I was born in the wrong household. From that day on   
I learned like lightning. Talk about adaptation! By the time I was ten I had lived out the   
whole theory of evolution. And there I was, evolving through all the phases of animal life   
and yet chained to this creature called my "sister" who was evidently a primitive being and   
who would never, even at the age of ninety, arrive at a comprehension of the alphabet   
Instead of growing up like a stalwart tree I began to lean to one side, in complete   
defiance of the law of gravity. Instead of shooting out limbs and leaves I grew windows and   
turrets. The whole being, as it grew, was turning into stone, and the higher I shot up the   
more I defied the law of gravity. I was a phenomenon in the midst of the landscape, but one   
which attracted people and elicited praise. If the mother who bore us had only made another   
effort perhaps 
 
298 
 
a marvellous white buffalo might have been born and the three of us might have been   
permanently installed in a museum and protected for life. The conversations which took   
place between the leaning tower of Pisa, the whipping post, the snorting machine and the   
pterodactyl in human flesh were, to say the least, a bit queer. Anything might be the   
subject of conversation - a bread crumb which the "sister" had overlooked in brushing the   
tablecloth or Joseph's coat of many colours which, in the old man's tailoring brain, might   
have been either double-breasted or cutaway or frock. If I came from the ice pond, where I   
 202 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had been skating all afternoon, the important thing was not the ozone which I had breathed   
free of charge, nor the geometric convolutions which were strengthening my muscles, but the   
little spot of rust under the clamps which, if not rubbed off immediately, might   
deteriorate the whole skate and bring about the dissolution of some pragmatic value which   
was incomprehensible to my prodigal turn of thought. This little rust spot, to take a   
trifling example, might entrain the most hallucinating results. Perhaps the "sister", in   
searching for the kerosene can, might overturn the jar of prunes which were being stewed   
and    thus    endanger    all    our    lives    by    robbing    us    of    the    required    calories    in    the    morrow's   
meal. A severe beating would have to be given, not in anger, because that would disturb the   
digestive apparatus, but silently and efficiently, as a chemist would beat up the white of   
an egg in preparation for a minor analysis. But the "sister", not understanding the   
prophylactic nature of the punishment, would give vent to the most bloodcurdling screams   
and this would so affect the old man that he would .go out for a walk and return two or   
three hours later blind drunk and, what was worse, scratching a little paint off the   
rolling doors in his blind staggers. The little piece of paint that had been chipped off   
would bring on a battle royal which was very bad for my dream life, because in my dream   
life I frequently changed places with my sister, accepting the tortures inflicted upon her   
and nourishing them with my supersensitive brain. It was in these dreams, always   
accompanied by the sound of glass breaking, of shrieks, curses, groans and sobs, that I   
gathered an 
 
299 
 
unformulated knowledge of the ancient mysteries, of the rites of initiation, of the   
transmigration of souls and so on. It might begin with a scene from real life - the sister   
standing by the blackboard in the kitchen, the mother towering over her with a ruler,   
saying two and two makes how much? and the sister screaming    five. Bang!    no, seven.    Bang!   
no, thirteen, eighteen as twenty! I would be sitting at the table, doing my lessons, just   
in real life during these scenes, when by a slight twist or squirm, perhaps as I saw the   
ruler come down on the sister's face, suddenly I would be in another realm where glass was   
unknown, as it was unknown to the Kickapoos or the Lenni-Lenapi. The faces of those about   
me were familiar - they were my uterine relatives who, for some mysterious reason, failed   
to recognize me in this new ambiance. They were garbed in black and the colour of their   
skin was ash grey, like that of the Tibetan devils. They were all fitted out with knives   
and other instruments of torture; they belonged to the caste of sacrificial butchers. I   
seemed to have absolute liberty and the authority of a god, and yet by some capricious turn   
of events the end would be that I'd be lying on the sacrificial block and one of my   
charming uterine relatives would be bending over me with a gleaming knife to cut out my   
heart. In sweat and terror I would begin to recite "my lessons" in a high, screaming voice,   
faster and faster, as I felt the knife searching for my heart. Two and two is four, five   
and five is ten, earth, air, fire, water, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, hydrogen, oxygen,   
nitrogen, Meocene, Pleocene, Eocene, the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, Asia, Africa,   
Europe, Australia, red, blue, yellow, the sorrel, the persimmon, the pawpaw, the catalpa ..   
.faster and faster... Odin, Wotan, Parsifal, King Alfred, Frederick the Great, the   
 203 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hanseatic League, the Battle of Hastings, Thermopylae, 1492,1786, 18l2, Admiral Farragut,   
Pickett's charge. The Light Brigade, we are gathered here today, the Lord is my shepherd, I   
shall not, one and indivisible, no, 16, no, 27, help! murder! police! - and yelling louder   
and louder and going faster and faster I go completely off my nut and there is no more   
pain, no more terror, even though they are piercing me everywhere with knives. Suddenly I   
am absolutely calm and 
 
300 
 
the body which is lying on the block, which they are still gouging with glee and ecstasy,   
feels nothing because I, the owner of it, have escaped. I have become a tower of stone   
which leans over the scene and watches with scientific interest. I have only to succumb to   
the law of gravity and I will fall on them and obliterate them. But I do not succumb to the   
law of gravity because I am too fascinated by the horror of it all. I am so fascinated, in   
fact, that I grow more and more windows. And as the light penetrates the stone interior of   
my being I can feel that my roots, which are in the earth, are alive and that I shall one   
day be able to remove myself at will from this trance in which I am fixed. 
 
So much for the dream, in which I am helplessly rooted. But in actuality, when the dear   
uterine relatives come, I am as free as a bird and darting to and fro like a magnetic   
needle. If they ask me a question I give them five answers, each of which is better than   
the other; if they ask me to play a waltz I play a double-breasted sonata for the left   
hand; if they ask me to help myself to another leg of chicken I dean up the plate, dressing   
and all; if they urge me to go out and play in the street I go out and in my enthusiasm I   
cut my cousin's head open with a tin can: if they threaten to give me a thrashing I say go   
to it, I don't mind! If they pat me on the head for my good progress at school I spit on   
the floor to show that I have still something to learn. I do everything they wish me to do   
plus. If they wish me to be quiet and say nothing I become as quiet as a rock: I don't hear   
when they speak to me, I don't move when I'm touched, I don't cry when I'm pinched, I don't   
budge when I'm pushed. If they complain that I'm stubborn I become as pliant and yielding   
as rubber. If they wish me to get fatigued so that I will not display too much energy I let   
them give me all kinds of work to do and I do the jobs so thoroughly that I collapse on the   
floor finally like a sack of wheat. If they wish me to be reasonable I become ultra- 
reasonable, which drives them crazy. If they wish me to obey I obey to the letter, which   
causes endless confusion. And all this because the molecular life of brother-and-sister is   
incompatible with the atomic weights which have been allotted us. Because she doesn't  
 
301 
 
grow at all I grow like a mushroom; because she has no personality I become a colossus;   
because she is free of evil I become a thirty-two branched candelabra of evil; because she   
demands nothing of any one I demand everything; because she inspires ridicule everywhere I   
inspire fear and respect; because she is humiliated and tortured I wreak vengeance upon   
every one, friend and foe alike; because she is helpless I make myself all-powerful. The   
 204 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gigantism from which I suffered was simply the result of an effort to wipe out the little   
stain of rust which had attached itself to the family skate, so to speak. That little stain   
of rust under the clamps made me a champion skater. It made me skate so fast and furiously   
that even when the ice had melted I was still skating, skating through the mud, through   
asphalt, through brooks and rivers and melon patches and theories of economics and so   
forth. I could skate through hell, I was that fast and nimble. 
 
But all this fancy skating was of no use - Father Coxcox, the pan-American Noah, was always   
calling me back to the Ark. Every time I stopped skating there was a cataclysm - the earth   
opened up and swallowed me. I was a brother to every man and at the same time a traitor to   
myself. I made the most astounding sacrifices, only to find that they were of no value. Of   
what use was it to prove that I could be what was expected of me when I did not want to be   
any of these things? Every time you come to the limit of what is demanded of you, you are   
faced with the same problem - to be yourself! And with the first step you make in this   
direction you realize that there is neither plus nor minus; you throw the skates away and   
swim. There is no suffering any more because there is nothing which can threaten your   
security. And there is no desire to be of help to others even, because why rob them of a   
privilege which must be earned? Life stretches out from moment to moment in stupendous   
infinitude. Nothing can be more real than what you suppose it to be. Whatever you think the   
cosmos to be it is and it could not possibly be anything else as long as you are you and I   
am I. You live in the fruits of your action and your action is the harvest of your thought.   
Thought and action are one, because swimming you are in it and of it, and 
 
302 
 
everything you desire it to be, no more, no less. Every stroke counts for eternity. The   
heating and cooling system is one system, and Cancer is separated from Capricorn only by an   
imaginary line. You don't become ecstatic and you are not plunged into violent grief; you   
don't pray for rain, neither do you dance a jig. You live like a happy rock in the midst of   
the ocean: you are fixed while everything about you is in turbulent motion. You are fixed   
in a reality which permits the thought that nothing is fixed, that even the happiest and   
mightiest rock will one day be utterly dissolved and fluid as the ocean from which it was   
born. 
 
This is the musical life which I was approaching by first skating like a maniac through all   
the vestibules and corridors which lead from the outer to the inner. My struggles never   
brought me near it, nor did my furious activity, nor my rubbing elbows with humanity. All   
that was simply a movement from vector to vector in a circle which however the perimeter   
expanded, remained withal parallel to the realm I speak of. The wheel of destiny can be   
transcended at any moment because at every point of its surface it touches the real world   
and only a spark of illumination is necessary to bring about the miraculous, to transform   
the skater to a swimmer and the swimmer to a rock. The rock is merely an image of the act   
which stops the futile rotation of the wheel and plunges the being into full consciousness.   
And full consciousness is indeed like an inexhaustible ocean which gives itself to sun and   
 205 
 216 
 
   
 
 
it is 
 
 
 
 
 
moon and also includes the sun and moon. Everything which is is born out of the limitless   
ocean of light - even the night. 
 
Sometimes, in the ceaseless revolutions of the wheel, I caught a glimpse of the nature of   
the jump which it was necessary to make. To jump dear of the clockwork - that was the   
liberating thought. To be something more, something    different,    than the most brilliant   
maniac of the earth 1 The story of man on earth bored me. Conquest, even the conquest of   
evil, bored me. To radiate goodness is marvellous, because it is tonic, invigorating,   
vitalizing. But just to be is still more marvellous, because it is endless and requires no   
demonstration. To be is music, which is a profanation of silence in the interests 
 
303 
 
of silence, and therefore beyond good and evil. Music is the manifestation of action   
without activity. It is the pure act of creation swimming on its own bosom. M usic neither   
goads nor defends, neither seeks nor explains. Music is the noisdess sound made by the   
swimmer in the ocean of consdousness. It is a reward which can only be given by oneself. It   
is the gift of the god which one is because he has ceased thinking about god. It is an   
augur of the God which every one will become in due time, when all that is will be beyond   
imagination. 
 
 
 
 
coda   
 
Not long ago I was walking the streets of New York. Dear old Broadway. It was night and the   
sky was an Oriental blue, as blue as the gold in the ceiling of the    Pagode,    rue de   
Babylone, when the machine starts clicking. I was passing exactly below the place where we   
first met. I stood there a moment looking up at the red lights in the windows. The music   
sounded as it always sounded - light, peppery, enchanting. I was alone and there were   
millions of people around me. It came over me, as I stood there, that I wasn't thinking of   
her any more; I was thinking of this book which I am writing, and the book had become more   
important to me than her, than all that had happened to us. Will this book be the truth,   
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help me God? Plunging into the crowd again I   
wrestled with this question of "truth". For years I have been trying to tell this story and   
always the question of truth has weighed upon me like a nightmare. Time and again I have   
related to others the circumstances of our life, and I have always told the truth. But the   
truth can also be a lie. The truth is not enough. Truth is only the core of a totality   
which is inexhaustible. 
 
I remember the first time we were ever separated this idea of totality seized me by the   
hair. She pretended, when she left me, or maybe she believed it herself, that it was   
necessary for our welfare. I knew in my heart that she was trying to be free of me, 
 
 
 
 
 206 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
304 
 
but I was too cowardly to admit it to myself. But when I realized that she could do without   
me, even for a limited time, the truth which I had tried to shut out began to grow with   
alarming rapidity. It was more painful than anything I had ever experienced before, but it   
was also healing. When I was completely emptied, when the loneliness had reached such a   
point that it could not be sharpened any further, I suddenly felt that, to go on living,   
this intolerable truth had to be incorporated into something greater than the frame of   
personal misfortune. I felt that I had made an imperceptible switch into another realm, a   
realm of tougher, more elastic fibre, which the most horrible truth was powerless to   
destroy. I sat down to write her a letter telling her that I was so miserable over the   
thought of losing her that I had decided to begin a book about her, a book which would   
immortalize her. It would be a book, I said, such as no one had ever seen before. I rambled   
on ecstatically, and in the midst of it I suddenly broke off to ask myself why I was so   
happy. 
 
Passing beneath the dance hall, thinking again of this book, I realized suddenly that our   
life had come to an end: I realized that the book I was planning was nothing more than a   
tomb in which to bury her - and the me which had belonged to her. That was some time ago,   
and ever since I have been trying to write it. Why is it so difficult? Why? Because the   
idea of an "end" is intolerable to me. 
 
Truth lies in this knowledge of the end which is ruthless and remorseless. We can know the   
truth and accept it, or we can refuse the knowledge of it and neither die nor be born   
again. In this manner it is possible to live forever, a negative life as solid and   
complete,    or    as    dispersed    and    fragmentary,    as    the    atom.    And    if    we    pursue    this    road    far   
enough, even this atomic eternity can yield to nothingness and the universe itself fall   
apart. 
 
For years now I have been trying to tell this story; each time I have started out I have   
chosen a different route. I am like an explorer who, wishing to circumnavigate the globe,   
deems it 
 
305 
 
unnecessary to carry even a compass. M oreover, from dreaming over it so long, the story   
itself has come to resemble a vast, fortified city, and I who dream it over and over, am   
outside the city, a wanderer, arriving before one gate after another too exhausted to   
enter. And as with the wanderer, this city in which my story is situated eludes me   
perpetually. Always in sight it nevertheless remains unattainable, a sort of ghostly   
citadel floating in the clouds. From the soaring, crenellated battlements flocks of huge   
white geese swoop down in steady, wedge-shaped formation. With the tips of their blue-white   
wings they brush the dreams that dazzle my vision. My feet move confusedly; no sooner do I   
gain a foothold than I am lost again. I wander aimlessly, trying to gain a solid,   
 
 
 207 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
unshakeable foothold whence I can command a view of my life, but behind me there lies only   
a welter of crisscrossed tracks, a groping, confused encircling, the spasmodic gambit of   
the chicken whose head has just been lopped off. 
 
Whenever I try to explain to myself the peculiar pattern which my life has taken, when I   
reach back to the first cause, as it were, I think inevitably of the girl I first loved. It   
seems to me that everything dates from that aborted affair. A strange, masochistic affair   
it was, ridiculous and tragic at the same time. Perhaps I had the pleasure of kissing her   
two or three times, the sort of kiss one reserves for a goddess. Perhaps I saw her alone   
several times. Certainly she could never have dreamed that for over a year I walked past   
her home every night hoping to catch a glimpse of her at the window. Every night after   
dinner I would get up from the table and take the long route which led to her home. She was   
never at the window when I passed and I never had the courage to stand in front of the   
house and wait. Back and forth I passed, back and forth, but never hide nor hair of her.   
Why didn't I write her? Why didn't I call her up? Once I remember summoning enough pluck to   
invite her to the theatre. I arrived at her home with a bunch of violets, the first and   
only time I ever bought flowers for a woman. As we were leaving the theatre the violets   
dropped from her corsage, and in my confusion I stepped on them. I begged her to leave them   
there, but she insisted on 
 
306 
 
gathering them up. I was thinking how awkward I was - it was only long afterwards that I   
recalled the smile she had given me as she stooped down to pick up the violets. 
 
It was a complete fiasco. In the end I ran away. Actually I was running away from another   
woman, but the day before leaving town I decided to see her once again. It was midaftemoon   
and she came out to talk to me in the street, in the little areaway which was fenced on".   
She was already engaged to another man; she pretended to be happy about it but I could see,   
blind as I was, that she wasn't as happy as she pretended to be. If I had only said the   
word I am sure she would have dropped the other fellow; perhaps she would even have gone   
away with me. I preferred to punish myslef. I said goodbye nonchalantly and I went down the   
street like a dead man. The next morning I was bound for the Coast, determined to start a   
new life. 
 
The new life was also a fiasco. I ended up on a ranch in Chula Vista, the most miserable   
man that ever walked the earth. There was this girl I loved and there was the other woman,   
for whom I felt only a profound pity. I had been living with her for two years, this other   
woman, but it seemed like a lifetime. I was twenty-one and she admitted to be thirty-six.   
Every time I looked at her I said to myself - when I am thirty she will be forty-five, when   
I am forty she will be fifty-five, when I am fifty she will be sixty-five. She had fine   
wrinkles under the eyes, laughing wrinkles, but wrinkles just the same. When I kissed her   
they magnified a dozen times. She laughed easily, but her eyes were sad, terribly sad. They   
were Armenian eyes. Her hair, which had been red once, was now a peroxide blonde. Otherwise   
 208 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she was adorable - a Venusian body, a Venusian soul, loyal lovable, grateful, everything a   
woman should be,    except that she was fifteen years older.    The fifteen years difference   
drove me crazy. When I went out with her I thought only - how will it be ten years hence?   
Or else, what age does she seem to have now? Do I look old enough for her? Once we got back   
to the house it was all right. Climbing the stairs I would run my fingers up her crotch,   
which used to make her whinny like a horse. If her son, who was almost my 
 
307 
 
age, were in bed we would dose the doors and lock ourselves in the kitchen. She'd lie on   
the narrow kitchen table and I'd slough it into her. It was marvellous. And what made it   
more marvellous was that with each performance I would say to myself -    This is the last     
time ... tomorrow I will beat it! And then, since she was the janitress, I would go down to   
the cellar and roll the ash barrels out for her. In the morning, when the son had left for   
work, I would climb up to the roof and air the bedding. Both she and the son had T.B....   
Sometimes there were no table bouts. Sometimes the hopelessness of it all got me by the   
throat and I would put on my things and go for a walk. Now and then I forgot to return. And   
when I did that I was more miserable than ever, because I knew that she would be waiting   
for me with those large sorrowful eyes. I'd go back to her like a man who had a sacred duty   
to perform. I'd lie down on the bed and let her caress me; I'd study the wrinkles under her   
eyes and the roots of her hair which were turning red. Lying there like that, I would often   
think about the other one, the one I loved, would wonder if she were lying down for it too,   
or... Those long walks I took 365 days of the year! -1 would go over them in my mind lying   
beside the other woman. How many times since have I relived these walks! The dreariest,   
bleakest, ugliest streets man ever created. In anguish I relive these walks, these streets,   
these first smashed hopes. The window is there, but no M elisande; the garden too is there,   
but no sheen of gold. Pass and repass, the window always vacant. The evening star hangs   
low; Tristan appears, then Fidelio, and then Oberon. The hydra-headed dog barks with all   
his mouths and though there are no swamps I hear the frogs croaking everywhere. Same   
houses, same car-lines, same everything. She is hiding behind the curtain, she is waiting   
for me to pass, she is doing this or doing that...    but she is not there, never, never,   
never. Is it a grand opera or is it a hurdygurdy playing? It is Amato bursting his golden   
lung; it is the Rubaiyat, it is Mount Everest, it is a moonless night, it is a sob at dawn,   
it is a boy making believe, it is Puss in the Boot, it is Mauna Loa, it is fox or   
astrakhan, it is of no stuff and no time, it is endless and it begins over and over, under   
the heart, in the back of the 
 
308 
 
throat, in the soles of the feet, and why not just once, just once, for the love of Christ,   
just a shadow or a rustle of the curtain, or a breath on the window-pane, something once,   
if only a lie, something to stop the pain, to stop this walking up and down ... Walking   
homeward. Same houses, same lamp posts, same everything. I walk past my own home, past the   
cemetery, past the gas tanks, past the car barns, past the reservoir, out into the open   
 209 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
country. I sit beside the road with my head in my hands and sob. Poor bugger that I am, I   
can't contract my heart enough to burst the veins. I would like to suffocate with grief but   
instead I give birth to a rock. 
 
Meanwhile the other one is waiting. I can see her again as she sat on the low stoop waiting   
for. me, her eyes large and dolorous, her face pale and trembling with eagerness.    Pity    I   
always thought it was that brought me back, but now as I walk towards her and see the look   
in her eyes I don't know any more what it is, only that we will go inside and lie together   
and she will get up half weeping, half laughing, and she will grow very silent and watch   
me, study me as I move about, and never ask me what is torturing me, never, never, because   
that is the one thing she fears, the one thing she dreads to know. I don't love you! Can't   
she hear me screaming it? I don't love you! Over and over I yell it, with lips tight, with   
hatred in my heart, with despair, with hopeless rage. But the words never leave my lips. I   
look at her and I am tongue-tied. I can't do it ... Time, time, endless time on our hands   
and nothing to fill it but lies. 
 
Well, I don't want to rehearse the whole of my life leading up to the fatal moment - it is   
too long and too painful. Besides, did my life really lead up to this culminating moment? I   
doubt it. I think there were innumerable moments when I had the chance to make a beginning,   
but I lacked the strength and the faith. On the night in question I deliberately walked out   
on myself: I walked right out of the old life and into the new. There wasn't the slightest   
effort involved. I was thirty then. I had a wife and child and what is called a   
"responsible" position. These are the facts and facts mean nothing. The truth is my desire   
was so 
 
309 
 
great it became a reality. At such a moment what a man does is of no great importance, it's   
what he    is    that counts. It's at such a moment that a man becomes an angel. That is   
precisely what happened to me: I became an angel. It is not the purity of an angel which is   
so valuable, as the fact it can fly. An angel can break the pattern anywhere at any moment   
and find its heaven; it has the power to descend into the lowest matter and to extricate   
itself at will. The night in question I understood it perfectly. I was pure and inhuman, I   
was detached, I had wings. I was depossessed of the past and I had no concern about the   
future. I was beyond ecstasy. When I left the office I folded my wings and hid them beneath   
my coat. 
 
The dance hall was just opposite the side entrance of the theatre where I used to sit in   
the afternoons instead of looking for work. It was a street of theatres and I used to sit   
there for hours at a time dreaming the most violent dreams. The whole theatrical life of   
New York was concentrated in that one street, so it seemed. It was Broadway, it was   
success, fame, glitter, paint, the asbestos curtain and the hole in the curtain. Sitting on   
the steps of the theatre I used to stare at the dance hall opposite, at the string of red   
lanterns which even in the summer afternoons were lit up. In every window there was a   
 210 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spinning ventilator which seemed to waft the music into the street, where it was broken by   
the jangled din of traffic. Opposite the other side of the dance hall was a comfort station   
and here too I used to sit now and then, hoping either to make a woman or make a touch.   
Above the comfort station, on the street level, was a kiosk with foreign papers and   
magazines; the very sight of these papers, of the strange languages in which they were   
printed, was sufficient to dislocate me for the day. 
 
Without the slightest premeditation I climbed the stairs to the dance hall, went directly   
to the little window of the booth where Nick, the Greek, sat with a roll of tickets in   
front of him. Like the urinal below and the steps of the theatre, this hand of the Greek   
now seems to me a separate and detached thing - the enormous, hairy hand of an ogre   
borrowed from some horrible Scandinavian fairy-tale. It was the hand which spoke to me 
 
310 
 
always, the hand which said "M iss Mara will not be here tonight," or "Yes, Miss M ara is   
coming late tonight." It was this hand which I dreamt of as a child when I slept in the   
bedroom with the barred window. In my fevered sleep suddenly this window would light up, to   
reveal the ogre clutching at the bars. Night after night the hairy monster visited me,   
clutching at the bars and gnashing its teeth, I would awake in a cold sweat, the house   
dark, the room absolutely silent 
 
Standing at the edge of the dance floor I notice her coming towards me; she is coming with   
sails spread, the large full face beautifully balanced on the long, columnar neck. I see a   
woman perhaps eighteen, perhaps thirty, with blue-black hair and a large white face, a full   
white face in which the eyes shine brilliantly. She has on a tailored blue suit of   
duveteen. I remember distinctly now the fulness other body, and that her hair was fine and   
straight, parted on the side, like a man's. I remember the smile she gave me - knowing,   
mysterious, fugitive - a smile that sprang up suddenly, like a puff of wind. 
 
The whole being was concentrated in the face. I could have taken just the head and walked   
home with it; I could have put it beside me at night, on a pillow, and made love to it. The   
mouth and the eyes, when they opened up, the whole being glowed from them. There was an   
illumination which came from some unknown source, from a centre hidden deep in the earth. I   
could think of nothing but the face, the strange, womb-like quality of the smile, the   
engulfing immediacy of it. The smile was so painfully swift and fleeting that it was like   
the flash of a knife. This smile, this face, was borne aloft on a long white neck, the   
sturdy, swan-like neck of the medium -and of the lost and the damned. 
 
I stand on the comer under the red lights, waiting for her to come down. It is about two in   
the morning and she is signing off. I am standing on Broadway with a flower in my   
buttonhole, feeling absolutely clean and alone. Almost the whole evening we have been   
talking about Strindberg, about a character of his named Henriette. I listened with such   
tense alertness that I fell into a trance. It was as if, with the opening 
 211 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
311 
 
phrase, we had started on a race - in opposite directions. Henriette! Almost immediately   
the name was mentioned she began to talk about herself without ever quite losing hold of   
Henriette. Henriette was attached to her by a long, invisible string which she manipulated   
imperceptibly with one finger, like the street-hawker who stands a little removed from the   
black doth, on the sidewalk, apparently indifferent to the little mechanism which is   
jiggling on the doth, but betraying himself by the spasmodic movement of the little finger   
to which the black thread is attached. Henriette is me, my real self, she seemed to be   
saying. She wanted me to believe that Henriette was really the incarnation of evil. She   
said it so naturally, so innocendy, with an almost subhuman candour - how was I to believe   
that she meant it? I could only smile, as though to show her I was convinced. 
 
Suddenly I fed her coming. I turn my head. Yes, there she is coming full on, the sails   
spread, the eyes glowing. For the first time I see now what a carriage she has. She comes   
forward like a bird, a human bird wrapped in a big soft fur. The engine is going full   
steam: I want to shout, to give a blast that will make the whole world cock its ears. What   
a walk! It's not a walk, it's a glide. Tall, stately, full-bodied, self-possessed, she cuts   
the smoke and jazz and red-light glow like the queen mother of all the slippery Babylonian   
whores. On the comer of Broadway just opposite the comfort station, this is happening.   
Broadway - it's her realm. This is Broadway, this is New York, this is America. She's   
America on foot, winged and sexed. She is the lubet, the abominate and the sublimate - with   
a dash of hydrochloric add, nitto-glycerine, laudanum and powdered onyx. Opulence she has,   
and magnificence: it's America right or wrong, and the ocean on other side. For the first   
time in my life the whole continent hits me full force, hits me between the eyes. This is   
America, buffaloes or no buffaloes, America the emery wheel of hope and disillusionment.   
Whatever made America made her, bone, blood, muscle, eyeball, gait, rhythm; poise;   
confidence; brass and hollow gut. She's almost on top of me, the full face gleaming like   
calcium. The big soft fur is slipping from her shoulder. She doesn't notice it. She doesn't   
 
312 
 
seem to care if her clothes should drop off. She doesn't give a fuck about anything. It's   
America moving like a streak of lightning towards the glass warehouse of red-blooded   
hysteria. Amurrica, fur or no fur, shoes or no shoes. Amurrica C.O.D.    And scram, you   
bastards, before we plug you! It's got me in the guts, I'm quaking. Something's coming to   
me and there's no dodging it. She's coming head on, through the plate-glass window. If she   
would only stop a second, if she would only let me be for just one moment. But no, not a   
single moment does she grant me. Swift, ruthless, imperious, like Fate itself she is on me,   
a sword cutting me through and through... 
 
She has me by the hand, she holds it tight. I walk beside her without fear. Inside me the   
stars are twinkling; inside me a great blue vault where a moment ago the engines were   
pounding furiously. 
 212 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One can wait a whole lifetime for a moment like this. The woman whom you never hoped to   
meet now sits before you, and she talks and looks exactly like the person you dreamed   
about. But strangest of all is that you never realized before that you had dreamed about   
her. Your whole past is like a long sleep which would have been forgotten had there been no   
dream. And the dream too might have been forgotten had there been no memory, but   
remembrance is there in the blood and the blood is like an ocean in which everything is   
washed away but that which is new and more substantial even than life: REALITY.  
 
We arc seated in a little booth in the Chinese restaurant across the way. Out of the comer   
of my eye I catch the flicker of the illuminated letters running up and down the sky. She   
is still talking about Henriette, or maybe it is about herself. Her little black bonnet,   
her bag and fur are lying beside her on the bench. Every few minutes she lights a fresh   
cigarette which bums away as she talks. There is no beginning nor end; it spurts out other   
like a flame and consumes everything within reach. No knowing how or where she began.   
Suddenly she is in the midst of a long narrative, a fresh one, but it is always the same.   
Her talk is as formless as dream: there are no grooves, no walls, no exits, no stops. I   
have the feeling of being drowned 
 
313 
 
in a deep mesh of words, of crawling painfully back to the top of the net, of looking into   
her eyes and trying to find there some reflection of the significance of her words - but I   
can find nothing, nothing except my own image wavering in a bottomless well. Though she   
speaks of nothing but herself I am unable to form the slightest image of her being. She   
leans forward, with elbows on the table, and her words inundate me; wave after wave rolling   
over me and yet nothing builds up inside me, nothing that I can seize with my mind.''She's   
telling me about her father, about the strange life they led at the edge of Sherwood Forest   
where she was born, or at least she was telling me about this, but now it's about Henriette   
again, or is it Dostoievski? - I'm not sure - but anyway, suddenly I realize that she's not   
talking about any of these any more but about a man who took her home one night and as they   
stood on the stoop saying goodnight he suddenly reached down and pulled up her dress. She   
pauses a moment as though to reassure me that this is what she means to talk about. I look   
at her bewilderingly. I can't imagine by what route we got to this point.    What man?    What   
had he been saying to her? I let her continue, thinking that she will probably come back to   
it, but no, she's ahead of me again and now it seems the man, this man, is already dead; a   
suicide, and she is trying to make me understand that it was an awful blow to her, but what   
she really seems to convey is that she is proud of the fact that she drove a man to   
suicide. I can't picture the man as dead; I can only think of him as he stood on her stoop   
lifting her dress, a man without a name but alive and perpetually fixed in the act of   
bending down to lift up her dress. There is another man who was her father and I see him   
with a string of race horses, or sometimes in a little inn just outside Vienna; rather I   
see him on the roof of the inn flying kites to while the time away. And between this man   
who was her father and the man with whom she was madly in love, I can make no separation.   
He is some one in her life about whom she would rather not talk, but just the same she   
 213 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comes back to him all the time, and though I'm not sure that it was not the man who lifted   
up her dress neither am I sure that it wasn't the man who committed suidde. Per- 
 
314 
 
haps it's the man whom she started to talk about when we sat down to eat. Just as we were   
sitting down I remember now that she began to talk rather hectically about a man whom she   
had just seen entering the cafeteria. She even mentioned his name, but I forgot it   
immediately. But I remember her saying that she had lived with him and that he had done   
something which she didn't like - she didn't say what - and so she had walked out on him,   
left him flat, without a word of explanation. And then, just as we were entering the Chop   
Suey joint, they ran into each other and she was still trembling over it as we sat down in   
the little booth ... For one long moment I have the most uneasy sensation. M aybe every word   
she uttered was a lie! Not an ordinary lie, no, something worse, something indescribable.   
Only sometimes the truth comes out like that too, especially if you think you're never   
going to see the person again. Sometimes you can tell a perfect stranger what you would   
never dare reveal to your most intimate friend. It's like going to sleep in the midst of a   
party; you become so interested in yourself that you go to sleep. And when you're sound   
asleep you begin to talk to some one, some one who was in the same room with you all the   
time and therefore understands everything even though you begin in the middle of a   
sentence. And perhaps this other person goes to sleep also, or was always asleep, and   
that's why it was so easy to encounter him, and if he doesn't say anything to disturb you   
then you know that what you are saying is real and true and that you are wide-awake and   
there is no other reality except this being wide-awake asleep. Never before have I been so   
wide-awake and so sound asleep at the same time. If the ogre in my dreams had really pushed   
the bars aside and taken me by the hand I would have been frightened to death and   
consequently now dead, that is, forever asleep and therefore always at large, and nothing   
would be strange any more, nor untrue, even if what happened did not happen. What happened   
must have happened long ago, in the night undoubtedly. And what is now happening is also   
happening long ago, in the night, and this is no more true than the dream of the ogre and   
the bars which would not give, except that now the bars are broken and she 
 
315 
 
whom I feared has me by the hand and there is no difference between that which I feared and   
what is, because I was asleep and now I am wide-awake asleep and there is nothing more to   
fear, nor to expect, nor to hope for, but just this which is and which knows no end. 
 
She wants to go. To go... Again her haunch, that slippery glide as when she came down from   
the dance hall and moved into me. A gain her words ... "suddenly, for no reason at all, he   
bent down and lifted up my dress". She's slipping the fur around her neck; the little black   
bonnet sets her face off like a cameo. The round, full face, with Slavic cheek-bones. How   
could I dream this, never having seen it? How could I know that she would rise like this,   
dose and full, the face full white and blooming like a magnolia? I tremble as the fullness   
 214 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ot her thigh brushes me. She seems even a little taller than I, though she is not. It's the   
way she holds her chin. She doesn't notice where she's walking. She walks over things, on,   
on, with eyes wide open and staring into space. No past, no future. Even the present seems   
dubious. The self seems to have left her, and the body rushes forward, the neck full and   
taut, white as the face, full like the face. The talk goes on, in that low, throaty voice.   
No beginning, no end. I'm aware not of time nor the passing of time, but of timelessness.   
She's got the little womb in the throat hooked up to the big womb in the pelvis. The cab is   
at the curb and she is still chewing the cosmological chaff of the outer ego. I pick up the   
speaking tube and connect with the double uterus. Hello, hello, are yon there? Let's go!   
Let's get on with it - cabs, boats, trains, naptha launches; beaches, bedbugs, highways,   
byways, ruins; relics; old world, new world, pier, jetty; the high forceps; the swinging   
trapeze, the ditch, the delta, the alligators, the crocodiles, talk, talk; and more talk,   
then roads again and more dust in the eyes, more rainbows, more cloudbursts, more breakfast   
foods, more creams, more lotions. And when all the roads have been traversed and there is   
left only the dust of our frantic feet there will still remain the memory of your large   
full face so white, and the wide mouth with fresh lips parted, the teeth chalk white and   
each one perfect, and in this remembrance 
 
316 
 
nothing can possibly change because this, like your teeth, is perfect... 
 
It is Sunday, the first Sunday of my new life, and I am wearing the dog collar you fastened   
around my neck. A new life stretches before me. It begins with the day of rest. I lie back   
on a broad green leaf and I watch the sun bursting in your womb. What a clabber and clatter   
it makes! All this expressly for me, what? If only you had a million suns in you! If only I   
could lie here forever enjoying the celestial fireworks! 
 
I lie suspended over the surface of the moon. The world is in a womb-like trance: the inner   
and the outer ego are in equilibrium. You promised me so much that if I never come out of   
this it will make no difference. It seems to me that it is exactly 25,960 years since I   
have been asleep in the black womb of sex. It seems to me that I slept perhaps 365 years   
too    many. But    at any    rate I    am now    in the    right house,    among the    sixes, and    what lies   
behind me is well and what lies ahead is well. You come to me disguised as Venus, but you   
are Lilith, and I know it. My whole life is in the balance; I will enjoy the luxury of this   
for one day. Tomorrow I shall tip the scales. Tomorrow the equilibrium will be finished; if   
I ever find it again it will be in the blood and not in the stars. It is well that you   
promise me so much. I need to be promised nearly everything, for I have lived in the shadow   
of the sun too long. I want light and chastity - and a solar fire in the guts. I want to be   
deceived and disillusioned so that I may complete the upper triangle and not be continually   
flying off the planet into space. I believe everything you tell me, but I know also that it   
will all turn out differently. I take you as a star and a trap, as a stone to tip the   
scales, as a judge that is blindfolded, as a hole to fall into, as a path to walk, as a   
cross and an arrow. Up to the present I travelled the opposite way of the sun; henceforth I   
 215 
 216 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
travel two ways, as sun and as moon. Henceforth I take on two sexes, two hemispheres, two   
skies, two sets of everything. Henceforth I shall be double-jointed and double-sexed.   
Everything that happens will happen twice. I shall be as a visitor to this earth, partaking   
of its blessings and carrying off its gifts. I shall 
 
317 
 
neither serve nor be served. I shall seek the end in myself. 
 
I look out again at the sun - my first full gaze. It is blood-red and men are walking about   
on the roof-tops. Everything above the horizon is dear to me. It is like Easter Sunday.   
Death is behind me and birth too. I am going to live now among the life maladies. I am   
going to live the spiritual life of the pygmy, the secret life of the little man in the   
wilderness of the bush. Inner and outer have changed places. Equilibrium is no longer the   
goal - the scales must be destroyed. Let me hear you promise again all those sunny things   
you carry inside you. Let me try to believe for one day, while I rest in the open, that the   
sun brings good tidings. Let me rot in splendour while the sun bursts in your womb. I   
believe all your lies implicitly. I take you as the personification of evil, as the   
destroyer of the soul, as the M aharanee of the night. Tack your womb up on my wall, so that   
I may remember you. We must get going. Tomorrow, tomorrow... 
 
September 1938 Villa    Seurat,    Paris.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 216 
 216 
 
   
 
